
Porcelain-
agate

 

478 STONE OBJECTS [CH. 25

command both of the sea-route via the Persian Gulf and Charax Spasini (Moham-
merah) and of the land—route via Taxila, the Kabul valley and Herat. At a later
date, when the discovery by Hippalus of the monsoon trade—winds had opened up
the Red Sea route to Roman commerce, these objects no longer had to pass through
Parthian hands.I

Pebbles of jasper of various colours—red, green and yellowmare common in the
river-beds of Rajputana, Central India and the Central Provinces, particularly
those which drain the Satpﬁra Range, as well as in the son valley. Jade, comprising
both jadeite and the nephrite variety, comes from the well—known mines in the
Karakash valley of Eastern Turkestan ;2 nephrite jade is also found in Rewah State
in Central India, and jadeite in the Tunga valley of the Pamirs and the Myitkyina
district of Northern Burma. The few specimens unearthed at Taxila are more
likely to have come from Eastern Turkestan, the Pamirs or Rewah State than from so
far aﬁeld as Upper Burma.

Of lapis-lazuli, the chief source has long been the Kokcha valley of Badakshan
in Northern Afghanistan, but this stone is said vaguely to occur also in ‘ Tartary ’,
Tibet and China. Turquoise was imported from Persia, where it is still quarried
near Nishapur in the Khorasan Province near Kerman, and Karik, and near
Mashiz.3 Amethysts are found in the Santal Parganas of Bihar and Orissa and at
several spots in the Bashahr State on the Upper Sutlej ; they occur also occasionally
in the Dekhan trap. But the ﬁnest specimens come from the gem-gravels of Ceylon.
Garnets are found in mica schists at various places in Rajputana, notably at Rajmahal '
in Jaipur State, Sarwar in Kishengarh, Ajmer and Bhilwara; they are also found in
the Darjeeling district, Sikkim, Hyderabad State and at numerous localities in the
Madras Presidency. Beryl and aquamarine, which occur commonly in the granite peg-
matites of India, are nowadays obtained at Padiyur in the Coimbatore district and
at Vaniyambadi in the Salem district of the Madras Presidency, at Punnata in the
Mysore, and in the Toda hills of the Jaipur State in Rajputana. They are also known
to occur in the Nellore district of Madras and in the Hazaribagh district of Bengal.

The stone to which I have given the name of porcelain-agate, because of its
remarkable resemblance to porcelain, is new to geology. It is found at Taxila only
in the form of round ﬂat disks, evidently used for some kind of inlay-work during
the Maurya period. The disks vary from 2~3 in. in diameter, and 0-1 to 0-2 in. in
thickness. The stone, which is banded, appears on one side like an opaline chal-
cedony, on the other, which is brilliantly polished, as an opaque glass-like porcelain.
When ﬁrst examined by experts of the Indian Geological Department, the material
was taken to be an artiﬁcial porcelain, but further research has left no doubt that
it is a natural stone produced, possibly in a volcanic region, by the long-continued
heating of ordinary quartz. The speciﬁc gravity and chemical analysis of this stone,
as well as the results of its microscopic examination, are discussed below (pp. 50 5—6).

‘ See Schoff, Periplus of the Erythman Sea, pp. 193—4. 2 Cf. M.I.C. pp. 541, 685.
3 M 1.0. p. 678. Turquoise is also said to occur in Turkestan and in the Kojent and Karatyube

mountains.