
CH. 25] STONE OBJECTS 479

The semi-precious stones enumerated above were used only for small articles of
a more or less ‘brnamental character, and the commoner varieties of hard stones,
such as gneiss, hornblende, granite, sang-i—abri, etc., for those articles of daily use
——celts, pivot-stones, querns, mullers, etc.—-which were subject to excessive wear
and tear. On the other hand, household vessels which had to be turned on a lathe,
lamps, ladles, toilet—trays, caskets, palettes and objects generally which were not
exposed to rough usage, as well as sculptures in relief and in the round, were
naturally cut from the softer varieties of stone.

This general observation, however, is subject to certain qualiﬁcations. In the
prehistoric age, it had been customary to make certain vessels, particularly shallow
dishes, bowls and saucers, of gneiss, hornblende, granite and other refractory
stones, the stone being ﬁrst chipped and then ground away with the help of a
specially shaped stone—borer aided with sand as a fricatiVe. One of these borers,
dating from Chalcolithic times, was found at Mohenjo-daro, and is described in my
Mohenjo-daro and the Indus Civilisation, vol. II, p. 459. The same practice seems to
have been continued at Taxila into historic times, but the lathe also came early into
use, and there are some ﬁne specimens of Maurya vessels made of these hard stones,
which have been turned on the lathe instead of being ground out with the borer.
By the beginning of the Christian era, however, such vessels were almost invariably
made of one or other of the soft schist stones, or of steatite or alabaster.

Another exception to the general rule stated above is provided by some of the
querns and mullers. In the Chalcolithic Age saddle-querns had invariably been
made of hard stone—generally basalt or gneiss, and the saddle-quern and its mullet,
like the mortar and pestle, continued to be made of some similar hard stone like
quartzite, hornblende or abri; but when the stool—quern came into fashion, in the
Maurya period, both it and the mullet used with it were made of sandstone. This
may have been because it had been found by experience that sandstone was
peculiarly suited to the grinding of grains and spices, and because it lent itself
more readily to the ornamental carving which is found on many of these stool-
querns. The ﬁrst part of this observation applies also to the circular grindstones
(Class V, a) which were ﬁrst introduced at Taxila during the ﬁrst century of the
Christian era, and for which sandstone is still usually preferred. On the other hand,

the crushing mills of Class V, b, which had to be specially strong and durable, were

invariably made of hard quartzite.
The sandstone used for these objects in the Bhir Mound settlements, i.e. up to

the beginning of the second century B.C., is of four kinds: (1) the grey Taraki or
Kambial sandstone, which is found in plenty some 14 or 15 miles south-east of
Taxila, and which was used for the pillars and pilasters of the Jandial temple.I
(2) A spotted red and white sandstone which comes from Mathura near Agra.
(3) A buff-coloured, ﬁne-grained hard sandstone, usually with small black spots,
from Chunar near Benares. (4) A greyish quartz sandstone of very hard texture,
the provenance of which has not yet been ascertained. The second of these is well

‘ A strong axis of this rock runs along the Chirpar hills.
61-2

 

Uses to which
hard and soft
stones were
put

Varieties of
sandstone
used in Bhir

Mound
Settlements

 

i
a?
i
ii
:5