
on. 25] STONE OBJECTS 477

areas, and during the Chalcolithic Age was used freely for knives, scrapers,
weights and polishers. Abri, which is a lower cretaceous shell limestone of a
variegated chocolate and yellow colour, is abundant in the Hazara and Attock
districts, and in Mughal times was destined to become a favourite stone for the
inlay-work on buildings and pavements. At Taxila it was used for bowls, cups or
dishes, but is found only in the Bhir Mound settlement up to about 200 B.C. Many
of the other hard stones, such as basalt, quartzite, hornblende, hornblende-gneiss,
gneiss, granite, dolerite and basanite, were obtainable in the form of pebbles from
the beds of the neighbouring Tamra nala or Haro river, where the writer has
himself picked up specimens of most of them, as well as of sandstone, marble and
jasper. A few of those found in these torrent—beds to-day may, no doubt, have
found their way there from the ancient settlements now crumbled to ruin on their
banks, to which they were perhaps brought from afar in days gone by, but most of
them have certainly been washed down from the distant highlands on the east.

Other stones such as blue serpentine, green diorite and black Lydian, of which
there are only one or two specimens at TaXila, may have come from remote
localities which it is now hardly possible to identify.

Of the semi—precious stones, rock-crystal, agate and chalcedony are found in so
many localities in India that it is impossible to say whence the lapidaries of Taxila
obtained their supply. Rock crystal, which is a form of silica or quartz, occurs in
Kashmir and in the red marls of Mari in the .Mianwali district of the Panjab, but
some of the best crystal nowadays comes from Tankara in the Kathiawar peninsula
or from the bed of the Godivari in Madras. It is also found at Aurangpur, near
Delhi, Simbhalpur, Morvi, and other places. The ﬁnest agates (and some of the
agates from Taxila are unusually ﬁne), together with the closely allied chalcedony,
come from the Ahmadébﬁd and Kaira districts of Bombay, from Kathiawar and
from the Rﬁjpipla State, where agate—jasper is also found in company with them.

Other sources of agate-jasper are the beds of the Kistna, Godavari and Bhima'

rivers, but the Taxila stones are more likely to have come from the Rajpipla hills.
Good agates are also obtained from north of the Pangong Lake in the Rudok district
of Kashmir, from the Rajmahal hills and from the beds of the Narbada and Goda-
varI rivers. The main centre at which agates, chalcedony and carnelians are now
out and polished is Cambay, but the industry exists also at Jabalpur and other
places within reach of the amygdaloidal Dekhan trap. In the ﬁrst century A.D.,
when the Periplus of the Erythmacm Sea was written, the principal market for the
export of these stones to the Western world was at Barygaza, the modern Broach,
whither some were brought from Ujjayini (Ujjain), others no doubt from the
Kathiawar peninsula or from the Rajpipla State; and it seems highly probable that
many stones from these sources found their way up the Indus to Taxila. Small
Vessels made of agate were in vogue there, particularly during the Parthian domina—
tion, and it is noteworthy that Pliny attributes vessels of this class, for which large
prices were paid at Rome, to Parthia and Carmania, the fact being that at the time
when Pliny wrote the trade was still mainly in the hands of the Parthians, who had

MT 61

Semi-precious
stones