
CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 699

that it belonged to a relief depicting the cremation of the Buddha’s remains (A.G-B.G.
ﬁgs. 28 5—7).

From an iconographic point of View the Taxila collection furnishes us with a number of
interesting details, but with nothing particularly novel. We have already observed that the
Jovian or Herculean type of the Vajrapani (nos. I40, 192) is one that is well known to us. On
the other hand, we ﬁnd conﬁrmation here of the existence of the type of Paﬁcika and of Hariti
with the ‘horn of abundance’ (cf. nos. 1, 2, Pl. 211, A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 372, 373,).I As to the ﬁgures
of gods, we have already noted that it was the practice of this School to represent Brahma
in the form of a Brahman monk, young or old, and to distinguish Indra by a royal toque.
Indeed, we possess quite a series of these toques of different models but all of them of a
characteristic and symbolical shape (cf. nos. 147—50). Finally, let us note that, apart from
these usual deities, we catch glimpses here and there of at least one member of the Hindu
pantheon, whose popularity is well attested on the coins of the Kushan kings, namely Mahes’vara
or Siva with his bull (no. 151). (Cf. A.S.R. 1913—14, Pl. LXXII, a.)

Of the Bodhisattva Siddhartha, the future Sakya-muni, we have already mentioned several
images (nos. I 52, 153 and the pedestal, no. 94). A very magniﬁcent type of the Bodhisattva, in
all the elegance of his rich costume and princely jewels, is to be seen in no. 142(Pl. 223). That,
like no. 143 (P1. 224), it represents Maitreya, who will be born again for the last time as a Brahman,
with the same head-dress and the same kamandalu (water-vessel) as Brahma, is only What we
should expect and what we can hardly doubt. Where doubt would arise would be if one pre—
tended to discover images of a Bodhisattva other than Siddhartha and Maitreya. It would be
vain, for example, to attempt to ﬁnd the Avalokites’vara or Padmapani in the ﬁgurine of the
dew holding a large lotus in no. 123, which is only a fragment from the ‘Miracle at Sravasti’,
but that this dew is, from a sculptural point of View, the ancestor of the future Padmapani, or
that the Indra of the pedestal of no. 43 has already adopted the pensive attitude of the Japanese
Mirokou, we should not for a moment be inclined to dispute.

It is the same with the Buddhas. To say nothing of the archaic method of representing them
by their foot-prints (nos. 154), or of the stray piece from Mathura (no. 1 5 5), we have every type
of Gandharan image, some with waved or curling hair (no. I 56), some clean-shaven (no. I 57),
or moustached (nos. 158, 159), standing (nos. I 57, 159, 160), or sitting, sometimes in Indian,
sometimes in European fashion. This last attitude (no. 198) is a peculiarly interesting one,
because of its rarity. Then we possess one ﬁgure standing on a lotus (no. 160), which for this
very reason may be inferred to have formed part of a ‘ Great Miracle’ relief. And ﬁnally there
are two Buddhas standing side by side (no. 188), which were probably broken from a frieze
containing not less than seven such ﬁgures (A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 457). But, all told, we have only to
do with Sakya-muni himself and his reduplications, or with two of his human predecessors;

there is no question here of Dhyani-Buddhas any more than there is in the rest of the Gandhara
School.

CATALOGUE OF STONE SCULPTURES
By H. HARGREAVES, F.S.A.

I. Statuette in the round of pot—stone (impure talc or steatite), representing a goddess
seated on a four-legged throne. Height 4'62 in. She is clad in a classical dress consisting of
a long tunic and mantle; in her left hand she holds a ‘horn of plenty’ (cornucopia); her right
hand is wrapped in her mantle. On her head is a low poles. Over the stool is a coverlet with
chequered pattern. The type is a common one throughout the Graeco-Roman world and has
been identiﬁed variously as Demeter, Tyche, Fortuna, Bona Dea, etc. As early as the middle
of the sixth century B.C., Boupalos of Chios executed a statue of Tyche for Smyrna, which,

I See, however, the descriptions of nos. I and 2 infra. There is no reason to connect these two pieces
with either Buddhism or Gandhara. [J. M.]

Images, genii
and gods

The Bodhi-
sattvas

The Buddhas