
_, Wmm'W'n/artmwmm’

w Haw... M,M.W_

;
g
i
i
i
i
I
l,
l
l
i
l
g
z
3
E
2,

 

CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 709

to the ankles but leaving the right shoulder and right-half of the chest bare. Ear-rings, a
necklace and armlet on the upper right arm are the only ornaments. The almost feminine delicacy
of the features, the high-dressed hair and the halo all point to the ﬁgure being a dew. Of
phyllite. Height 127 5 in. Dh. ’16—238; mon. courtA; 2 ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. p. 278 supra.

72. Fragment of frieze of phyllite. Length I 5 in. The projecting cornice at the top is
relieved, on its face, with a saw-tooth moulding and double foliate bands between ﬁllets. Below
the cornice, three little amorini (yakshas), naked save for necklaces and anklets, support on
their shoulders an undulating garland decorated with varied foliate designs and bound by
ribbons with ﬂowing ends. The attitudes of the amorini are varied, one facing left, the centre
one half-right, while the third, which is now defaced, appears to have faced right. Their hands
pass over the top of the garland to hold it securely on the shoulders. Hanging from each of the
two bottom loops of the garland is a bunch of grapes, the left one of which is being pecked by

'a parrot On either side, while two tiny but well executed, naked, squatting amorini are picking

the grapes from the other. In the right upper space behind the garland appears the bust of
a winged dew, and in the corresponding space to the left the busts of a male and a female, half
turned to face each other. See pp. 328—9 supra and cf. nos. 73—5 infra and A.G—B.G. ﬁgs.
116—18. Kn. ’3 1—127; octagonal chamber, AI; 2 ft. below surface. (Pl. 216, no. 72.)

73. Fragment of frieze, of phyllite. Length 22' 5 in. Below a defaced scroll of vine leaves,
three amorini (yakshas) support on their right shoulders an undulating garland decorated with
varied foliate designs and bound by ribbons with ﬂowing ends. The amorini on the right and
left are naked save for necklaces and anklets; they face left, with left arm extended, and hand
resting on the front of the garland. The middle amorino, facing half-right, holds in the left
hand a tankard. All the amorini have shaven heads save for a little tuft of hair above the
forehead. From the bottom loop of the garland hangs a bunch of grapes half-hidden in large
vine leaves. Cf. no. 72 supra. In the upper right space behind the garland a winged deva faces
half-right with a tankard in the right hand, and in the corresponding space to the left is another
winged ﬁgure, much defaced, with hands clasped in adoration. A ﬂuttering parrot rests on
the upper, right edge of the garland. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 116—18. Dh. ’15—963; chapel B22.
(Pl. 216, no. 73.)

74. Fragment of frieze showing two standing amorini (yakshas), naked save for necklaces,
armletsand anklets, and supporting on their shoulders an undulating, foliated garland. Cf.
nos. 72, 73 supra. The one to the right faces right and supports the garland on his left shoulder
with the right hand in front of it. The other amorino, facing left, has the garland on his right
shoulder, the left hand on his hip. In the right, upper space behind the garland is a much
defaced, winged deva facing half—right, with an oﬁering in his joined hands. In the corre-
sponding space to the left is a defaced, winged dem‘ with an offering in her left hand. Of

‘ phyllite. Length 1937 in. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 116—18. Dh. ’15—1,195; found in the debris

south of P4. Cf. p. 267 supra.

75. Fragment of frieze with a half bead-and-reel moulding along lower edge, and above it
an undulating foliated garland supported by amorini (yakshas), naked save for the usual orna-
ments. Cf. nos. 72—4 supra. Only one amorino is preserved, bearing the garland on his left
shoulder and facing half-right. The ﬁgures in the upper spaces of the loops are defaced and
unidentiﬁable. The technique is poor. The right edge shows a rough tenon. Of phyllite.
Height 5-5 in. Dh. ’14—491; chapel D5. Cf. p. 249 supra.

76. Fragment of phyllite frieze showing, beneath an acanthus cornice, four ogee arches
resting on squat, pseudo—Indo-Corinthian pilasters. Cf. no. 77 infra. The arches are voluted
at the springing and have saw-tooth mouldings on the front face. They represent the open
fronts of structural caityas and show the ends and part of the long beams of the barrel roof.
These are plainly seen in the interiors of the two arches on the left. In those to the right only
the ends of the beams are seen on the underside of the arches. On the haunch of each arch rests
a long-tailed parakeet, its head turned to face its fellow on the adjoining arch. On the outer

MT go