
CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 711

85. Fragment of a large composition from a false gable-Window consisting of parts of two
of the arched frames with decorative devices between. The outer frame is enriched on its face
with a saw-tooth moulding; the inner frame with a foliate pattern on its inside. Between the
two is a conventionalised garland and part of the coils and leafy tail of a Triton—a creature
commonly found in this position in false gable-windows. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 233. To the right
of the outer frame are traces of stems and a six-petalled ﬂower. Of hornblende schist. Length
21-5 in. Dh. ’30—745; mon. court A; sq. 17-19’; 5 ft. 9 in. below surface. Cf. p. 278 supra.

86. Two fragments of phyllite from a false gable-Window, comprising part of two arched
frames and ﬁgures between. The inner frame has a cavetto lotus-leaf moulding on its face; the
outer frame a saw-tooth moulding, of which only a fragment survives. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 233.
In the corner between the two frames is a winged dragon with coiled tail, and higher up, near
the apex of the arch, a ﬁgure seated in European fashion on a low circular cane seat with high,
draped, round cushion. To the side of this seated ﬁgure is another standing ﬁgure clad from
the waist downwards in a dhoti. The upper parts of both ﬁgures are destroyed. Cf. no. 85 supra.
Height 14- 5 in. Dh. ’12—389; N4; 3 ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. pp. 262—3 supra.

87. Fragment of phyllite from the colfered ceiling of a portico with ﬁve square coffers in
a row, each containing a human bust and each enclosed in a broad square frame in low relief.
Observe that some of the corners of these frames are mitred like picture frames. The ﬁgure in
the second panel wears a close-ﬁtting cap with a fringe of curls showing under the edge above
the forehead, and a large circular ear ornament pendent from the right ear, the left ear being
hidden by the half-turned head. In the third panel the head is turned half-left and appears to
be wearing a close-ﬁtting cap concealing the ears. Although the faces are small and not
perfectly preserved, they show great individuality, very different from the routine sameness of
so many Gandhara ﬁgures. Two rectangular mortice-holes (one partly destroyed) at the side
of the coffers show how the slab was mortised into the wall. Length 22in. Dh. ’14—811; J2;
debris. Cf. p. 245 supra.

88. Curved fragment of phyllite, possibly from the drum of a small stﬁpa. Along the upper
edge is a conventionalised garland, a broad band of ﬂat ﬁllet and saw-tooth moulding. Below,
a broad band of acanthus foliage broken by a projecting kirtimukha(?) head, much defaced.
Length I 5 in. Dh. ’31—132; mon. court A; sq. 12-25’; 15 ft. below surface. Cf. p. 278 supra.

89. Draped female ﬁgure without head or arms, standing on a plain rectangular base with
long vertical tenon. The ﬁgure appears to be wearing a long chitén of ﬁne texture, which falls
in graceful folds to the feet, leaving the left leg bare. The top of it is seemingly folded over like
a Doric chitén and reaches as far as the hips. At the waist it is conﬁned by a twisted band. The
style is more distinctly classical than in the generality of Gandhara sculptures and it may have
been inspired by a Greek ﬁgure of Nike, but its Indian origin is betrayed by the muscular left
leg and the heavy anklet. The statue is not worked at the back. Pieces of gold—leaf with which
the stone was once covered are preserved under a later layer of lime plaster. Of pale grey schist.
Height I 5 in. Probably ﬁrst century A.D. Dh. ’14—314; east of 01; 3 ft. below surface.

Cf. p. 254 supra. (P1. 217, no. 89.)
90, a, b. Two fragments of panels depicting the Syama jataka. Unlike the representation

from Jamalgarhi (A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 143), the scenes in these panels converge towards the centre,
the action proceeding partly from right to left and partly from left to right. Of no. 90, b the
right end is broken, and of the drawing of water by Syama we see nothing, the action opening
with the king of Benares in the fatal act of discharging his arrow to the left. He stands facing
left, his back to the spectator, his attendant, behind him, holding a large quiver full of arrows.
Rocks and sparse vegetation indicate the wildness of the region, and a wild animal’s head is
seen at the mouth of a cave below. The boy Syama is shown with the arrow transﬁxing his
breast on the extreme right of no. 90, a. In this episode the king has placed aside, while he is
hunting, the elaborate turban worn by him in subsequent scenes. A defaced ﬁgure, with hand
upraised to a tree on the right of no. 90, b is part of the missing ﬁrst scene.

90-2