
CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 723

145. Head of elderly monk from a relief. Clean-shaven head and face. Strong, heavy
features with small, tight-lipped mouth, heavy eyebrows, furrOWed brow. Of phyllite. Height
3-2 in. Dh. ’14—331; west of main stﬁpa, in debris.

I46. Fragment from left of relief showing head and torso of a moustached ﬁgure, face
turned half—right. On the head is what at ﬁrst sight looks like the braided locks (jatd) of
a Brahman ascetic, but is in reality a turban of tightly twisted cloth. (Cf. P1. I49, c, d,- e, h.) The
ﬁgure wears a necklace and ear-pendant with cylindrical end. The defaced right hand is raised
to the breast in salutation; the left is lost. On the left shoulder are traces of drapery. The feet
of this ﬁgure are on a separate piece of stone, 7 in. high. (Dh. ’I3—I,373.) Of pale greenish
grey mica schist. Height I3~ 5 in. Dh. ’13—2,010; B 5; south wall; 2 ft. 6 in. below surface.
Cf. p. 249 supra.

I47. Head of Indra from a relief. Moustached. Round the head, above the forehead, is a
Chaplet, consisting of four strings of beads broken at intervals by ﬁve-petalled roses. Above
this rises a head—dress, in the form of an inverted, truncated cone, embellished by incised
diamond pattern. The only visible hair falls below the Chaplet to the, now missing, ears. Nose
damaged. Of phyllite. Height 4 in. Dh. ’12—1, 567; between L and D 5; 4 ft. 3 in. below surface.
Cf. p. 251 supra. (Pl. 225, no. 147.)

I48. Fragment from left of a relief. Beneath a stylised canopy of leaves, arranged in circles
round a central boss, is the head of a youthful Indra, facing right. His head-dress resembles
a close-ﬁtting cap, crowned by an inverted, truncated cone, embellished as in preceding
example. Round the base of the cap is a circlet of gadrooned beads. The only visible hair falls
below the cap to the right ear. Of phyllite. Height 8 in. Dh. ’13—70; between L and D 5;
5 ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra. (Pl. 224, no. I48.)

I49. Fragment from right of a relief showing Indra’s head, moustached, face turned slightly
to the right. His head—dress consists of a low-crowned hat ornamented with a much-defaced
ﬂoral design and, below it, a Chaplet of (P) beads. Beneath the latter appears a narrow line of
hair. A heavy ear—pendant and jewelled collar are still intact. Of phyllite. Height 575 in.
Dh. ’12—1 5 5; between L and D 5; 2 ft. 3 in. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra.

150. Fragment of relief showing Indra’s head, moustached. Nose, chin and left eye are
damaged. Head—dress resembles that of no. 149 supra, and consists of a low-crowned hat rising
above a Chaplet. The hat is decorated with small, framed panels containing alternately a ﬁve-
petalled eglantine and a pair of human ﬁgures. Of phyllite. Height 4-25 in. Dh. ’Iz—C I74.

I 5 I. Fragment of relief showing Siva clad in dhotz', standing with his back to his bull, which
has its lowered head to Siva’s right. All of Siva, above the waist, is missing, as is also the bull’s
back. Of rough workmanship. Cf. A.G-B.G. II, Pl. V, I6, 18, and A.S.R. (1915), p. 8, no. 32.
Of phyllite. Height 6.25 in. Dh. ’I5—I,5o7; U I east; 8 in. below surface.

I 52. Relief showing the Bodhisattva Siddhartha haloed and standing, right hand in abhaya-
mudrd, left on the hip. Over his head is a parasol, the edge adorned with a beaded border and
looped fringe with pendent bells. The ﬁgure is clad in a skirt tied at the waist; a light scarf
hangs from the left shoulder, across the chest and round the right thigh, leaving the chest bare.
The feet are lost. On his head is an elaborate turban with high, circular, frontal ornaments.
(Cf. A.G-B.G. I, frontispiece.) Against the halo are seen the short ends of the ribbon which
ties the turban. Long ear-pendants, jewelled collar, ﬂexible necklace and bracelets are his
ornaments. By the Bodhisattva’s left side stands a small, female ﬁgure in easy attitude, left
hand on hip, left foot brought behind the right, toes to the ground, heel upwards. The lost
face is turned upwards to the Bodhisattva, right hand upraised, as if in salutation. She wears
a collar, necklace, bracelets and anklets. By the Bodhisattva’s right shoulder, the left arm and
vajra of Vajrapani are seen; by the left shoulder traces of another ﬁgure. The presence of
Vajrapani is abnormal, for he ﬁrst appears in scenes of the Renunciation, which is not that
represented here. It is possible that he may be part of a missing scene to the left, not connected
with the Bodhisattva ﬁgure. The small, female ﬁgure is also unusual and is not in the customary