
714 STONE SCULPTURES [CH- 36

fragment comprises three defaced female ﬁgures. The one on the right is seated on a low chair
with. ornamented back and cushioned seat, at the end of which is a narrow ﬂounce with
conventionalised folds partly concealing the wickerwork beneath. Her legs are crossed, the
left above the right, and her head rests in her uplifted left arm; her right arm hangs by her side.
The ﬁgure is fully clad and wears heavy ear-pendants, necklace, beaded girdle and large anklets.
Behind her, in the upper background, a standing female holds in her left hand a six—stringed
musical instrument, while to the left is another sleeping female with her left elbow on her knee,
and her head resting in her hand. Of phyllite. Height 19- 5 in. Dh. ’I2—2,209; south of J;
3 ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra. (Pl. 218, no. 99.)

100. Bust of a female ﬁgure, probably from the same relief as the foregoing. Her head is
leaning slightly to her right, her eyes closed in slumber. The hair is dressed close to the side
of the head but drawn up in a thick wave in the centre above the forehead. At the back it is
conﬁned by a jewelled bandeau twisted round the head and ﬁnishing above in a pointed end.
In front, above the waved hair is a defaced ornament. The ﬁgure is fully clothed and wears an
ornamented ﬂat necklace. Under her left arm, she carries a small drum, or other musical
instrument, supported by a cord over the left shoulder. Of phyllite. Dh. ’12—2,347; between L
and D5; 4 ft. 3 in. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra. (Pl. 218, no. 100.)

101. Fragment from a relief depicting the ‘ Flight from the Palace ’. Only parts of the ﬁgure
of the Bodhisattva and of the horse remain. The horse is shown in proﬁle moving to the left,
the head and legs are now lost. Of interest are the trappings, but the fracture of the stone
renders their interpretation difﬁcult. They include part of the bridle, a single rein, martingale,
breast-strap and crupper. The rider sits well back in the saddle; the left hand is lost; the long
robe on the near side falls in schematic folds below the saddle but exposes the quilted back
portion. Of phyllite. Height 6-75 in. Cf. A.S.R. (1915), P1. VI, 2. Dh. ’15—I,082; from the
outside debris.

102. Small headless image of the fasting Bodhisattva, seated in meditation, on a grass—strewn
throne, of which the front has a saw-tooth moulding along the upper edge and ﬁllet and ogee
moulding on a squared plinth below. In order to reveal the results of his austerities, his robe
is drawn open to expose the whole torso, but the emaciation is not very marked save for the
narrow waist, and the treatment of the subject is characterless in comparison with such repre-
sentations as Lahore Museum no. 2099, and Peshawar Museum no. 799. Cf. A.G-B.G.
ﬁgs. 200, a and 440. Of phyllite. Height 6- 5 in. Kn. ’3 1—560; front of A19; 6‘8 ft. below surface.
Cf. p. 332 supra.

103. Fragment from left of a relief depicting the ‘Offering of the Grass’. On the extreme
left is a circular, broken column against which lies a bundle of grass bound round by a rope,
and on it what appears to be the right hand and arm of the grass-cutter, Svastika. Of phyllite.
Height 5-75 in. Dh. ’12—844; between L and D 3; 5 ft. 7 in. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra.

104. Fragment from the right side of a relief. The Buddha, who must have been the central
ﬁgure, is lost. In the middle of the fragment is a ﬁgure in Kushan costume, wearing
trousers, boots, a long coat of imbricated mail and an elaborate turban with high circular
ornament, on the left side. His head is turned towards the now missing Buddha, whilst his feet
rest on the back of a prone male. In front of his waist he holds a short sword, his left hand on the
scabbard, his right grasping the hilt, as if about to draw it. Behind is a personage of high caste,
his right hand upraised as if in salutation. On the left is a tall, fully clothed, wandering ascetic,
with hair piled high, right hand also raised to the shoulder as in salutation, the left grasping a
long staff (khakkhara) with a knob at the top. The relief presents some unusual features in the
presence of the ascetic and the prone male ﬁgure. But of those who attack the Buddha—
Angulimﬁla, Atavika and Mara—only the last assumes the costume of a warrior (cf. A.G-B.G.
ﬁgs. 201, 204, 404), while prostrate ﬁgures of his army are not unknown in scenes depicting
his attack. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 203, 402. Of phyllite. Height 8-2 in. Kn. ’3 1—106; A1,
square chamber; 2 ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. pp. 328—9 supra. (Pl. 219, no. 104.)