
.np-W QRMAH» _.M Ni

LBW..— . a.

s» “mwmm'i

‘3,
i:
:1
l
i,
i
3
f.
l

 

 

 

CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 701

3. Standing female ﬁgure of chloritised mica schist, in the round. Height 9 in. The ﬁgure
is naked save for a shawl or sari, which falls over the left arm and below the hips. The left hand
holds the hem of the surf; in the right hand, which is raised to the breasts, is a lotus. Her
ornaments consist of a hip girdle (mekhald) with square clasp in front and three rows of beads;
a breast—chain, crossed both front and back; bracelets; armlets; and a narrow taenia across the
forehead. The hair is taken back from the forehead and falls in a long plait down the back, with
a few curls on the two shoulders. On the crown of the head, at the back, is an ornamental
medallion. The type appears to be derived from a Greek Aphrodite type, but is much Indianised.
It may have been intended to represent an Indian yakshz‘ or fairy; but it seems more likely to
be the goddess holding a lotus in her hand who is portrayed on certain autonomous coins of
TaXila, and may represent either the Tyche of the city, or, more probably, Maya. (B.M. Cat.
Am. Ind. Coins, Pl. XXXII, 5, 6). In the Gandhara School, to which this sculpture belongs,
ﬁgures in the round are very rare and for the most part earlier than the usual alto rilievos.
(Cf. Mathura Museum, F42.) This statuette dates from the Saka—Parthian period and is probably
to be referred to the early part of the ﬁrst century A.D. For the deposit (G) in which it was
found in company with a large collection of copper dies, see vol. I, p. 189. Sk. ’19-790;
Block D’; sq. 58-116’; stratum II. Cf. A.S.R. (1919), PI. IX, 1, 2. (Pl. 211, no. 3, a, b.)

4. Standing female ﬁgure in the round of chloritised mica schist, probably dating from the
ﬁrst century B.C. Height 725 in. The pose is rigidly frontal, with feet front, legs together, and
hands on hips. Save for ornaments consisting of anklets, girdle, crossed breast-chain, armlets
and bangles, the ﬁgure is nude. The hair, which is treated like a wig in front, is taken back
from the forehead and falls in a long plait down the back, with a few curls on each shoulder.
On the top of the head is a low polos. Beneath the small base is a projecting tenon, evidently
intended to ﬁt into a socket-hole. In ancient times the statuette was broken into two at the
knees, and, in order to repair it, two small holes were drilled between the legs, one above and
one below the fracture. The stiff frontal pose and the poles on the head suggest a Caryatid, but
the ﬁgure is so small that it can hardly have served that purpose. Possibly the sculptor was
endeavouring to portray an archaic type, such as that of the ‘Mother or Earth goddess’,
which was still being perpetuated at TaXila as late as the ﬁrst century A.D., but this is quite
problematical. Cf. pp. 195-6 supra; A.S.R. (1929), P1. XVI, I, 2. Sk. ’29—1,2o6; Block A’;
sq. 18-93’; stratum III. (Pl. 211, no. 4, a, b.)

5. Standing female ﬁgure in the round of pale grey micaceous slate. Height 4-12 in. The
ﬁgure, which may be that of a donor belonging to a group, wears a sleeved tunic reaching to
the feet, and a cloak which appears to be held in place by shoulder-straps passing in front of
the shoulders and attached, perhaps, to the belt. The hands are raised in front of the waist and
support a tray(?) full of ﬂowers or other offerings. The ornaments worn comprise anklets,
bangles and girdle (mekhald). The head, which was made in a separate piece and joined to the
body by a tenon and socket, is missing, but two plaits of hair are shown falling over the cloak
at the back. Probable date, early ﬁrst century A.D. Cf. p. 191 supra; A.S.R. (1928), P1. XIX, 2.
Sk. ’28—I,163; Block D’; sq. 63-100’; stratum II. (Pl. 212, no. 5, a, b.)

6. Standing male ﬁgure in the round of grey Taraki sandstone.I Height I6 in. Wears dhotz‘,
shawl, bracelets and necklace( P). The right hand is raised in front of the breast with the ﬁngers
in what is known as the chin-mudra or jndﬁa—mudrd, denoting meditation, knowledge and purity.
The left hand rests on the hip. The head and feet are missing. Although the ﬁgure is ostensibly
in the round, the front is ﬂattened as in a relief and the back is not modelled. As the sculpture
was found at the Dharmarajika Stﬁpa, there can be no doubt that it is Buddhist, and we may
surmise that it represents the Bodhisattva at a period when his types had not yet been ﬁxed.
Like nos. 7 and I 5, it is the work of a local sculptor of Taxila. Date, early part of the ﬁrst
century A.D. or perhaps the latter part of the preceding century. See p. 694 supra. Dh. ’12~277;
north-east ofMain Stﬁpa; 3 ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. A.S.R. (1912), P1. VII, d. (P1. 212, no. 6.)

‘ This sandstone is impregnated with calcium carbonate.

MT 89