
720 STONE SCULPTURES [CH. 36

nos. 123 supra and 130 infra. Of phyllite. Height 13 in. Dh. ’13—1,126; eastern stairs of Main
Stﬁpa. (Pl. 221, no. 129.)

130. Figure of a haloed deva 0r Bodhisattva seated on a lotus throne. Face is turned half-
right. The robe entirely conceals the body. The hair, dressed high, falls in waves on the right
side of the head. Ear-rings and necklace (P) are the only jewels. The right hand is placed on the
breast, palm inward; the left lies in the lap. Apparently from a relief such as no. 129 supra.
Of phyllite. Height 5-12in. Cf. A.S.R. (1915), p. 6, A5. Dh. ’15—1,47o; main stﬁpa, east
entrance; 2 ft. below surface.

13 1. A well—modelled head of a woman. The face is full, the eyes closed. The hair is dressed
ﬂat to the head and is crowned by a Chaplet, composed of three rows of beads, with a four—
petalled ﬂower in the centre. The closed eyes suggest that the head is from a representation of
the ‘ Sleep of the Women’. Cf. nos. 98—100 supra. Of phyllite. Height 3-8 in. Cf. p. 249 supra; .
A.S.R. (1912), PI. VII, a, 2. Dh. ’13—144; chapel D 5; I ft. below surface.

132. Relief depicting the last episode in the ‘Miracle of Sravasti’. Under a mango tree the
haloed Buddha is seated on a grass-strewn throne, the front embellished by a diamond trellis,
with a four-leaved ﬂower in each diamond, the points of the leaves in the angles. The left hand
of the Buddha, now lost, lay in his lap; his right is resting, palm upward, by his knee. On the
left of the Buddha is king Prasenajit on a low, draped seat, his hands, now defaced, clasped in
adoration. Behind him are traces of a standing ﬁgure. On the Buddha’s right are two naked
tirtharikaras, the nearer, now headless, seated like the king in European fashion on a circular
rattan stool, both hands resting on his left knee. His disciple, bald-headed and exceedingly
ill—featured, stands behind him with right arm bent until the hand rests on the shoulder. The
seated, headless tirthaﬁkara is apparently Purina Kasyapa. In the background, on the Buddha’s
right, is Vajrapani, with vajra in his left hand and his right arm wrapped in his robe, the hand
alone protruding from the neck of the garment. The corresponding position on the Buddha’s
left is occupied by a standing, adoring ﬁgure, without halo—possibly one of king Prasenajit’s
followers. The scene seems to illustrate very closely a phrase in the fataka: ‘The Master,
having performed the yamaka—pdtihdriya and having realised the readiness of many people to
believe, descended and sat on his Buddha throne and taught the law.’ The only difﬁculty is that
the hands are not in the teaching attitude according to the Gandhara School. But the general
conception of the scene is more in keeping with the earlier Indian School and with the Pali
tradition which designates this event as ‘the miracle at the foot of the mango tree ’. Of phyllite.
Height II in. Dh. ’12-278; between L and D 3; 4. ft. below surface. Cf. pp. 251, 698 supra.
(Pl. 222, no. 132.)

133. Fragment from right side of a relief showing two standing Brahman ascetics, the one
on the left, a brahmacarin, wearing a short dhotz' of woven material. His long hair falls from
a topknot on either side of his head. His companion, an old, bald and bearded man, holds
a water-pot (kamandalu) in the crook of his bent left arm. His only garment is a short skirt,
apparently made of twisted and knotted ﬁbres, probably from the inner bark of a tree. This
material resembles that forming the lower part of the paruas'a'ld of no. 134 infra. Cf. A.G-B.G.
ﬁg. 189. Of phyllite. Height 6-5 in. Kn. ’13—161; A1; west of stﬁpa in octagonal chamber;
5 ft. 3 in. below surface. Cf. pp. 328—9 supra. (Pl. 222, no. 133.)

I34. Fragment from left of a relief showing an aged, bearded anchorite, seated in his leaf
hut (paruas’a'la) on a rolled mat (brishi), his hands clasped round his crossed legs below the
knees. His ribs are clearly seen under the bare right arm. Before him is a ﬁre-altar resembling
those carved in the solid rock at Persepolis, and quite unlike the egg-cup shaped vea’i shown
in the Kasyapa scenes on the east gate at Sanchi. The leaf hut is not made uniformly of one
material. The lower part resembles somewhat the garment of the old Brahman in no. 13 3 supra
(cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 189). Below the anchorite and the ﬁre—altar is a narrow frieze, and
on it an undulating garland-like stem with a half-eglantine in each loop. Under the frieze
is a head of a youthful ﬁgure from a now lost scene. For the motif, cf. ‘Seals and Sealings’,