
CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 715

105. Fragment from left of a relief depicting Mara’s attack. Cf. no. 104 supra. To the right,
the haloed Buddha is seated on a grass-strewn throne under a pipal tree, his left hand grasping
the edge of his robe, his right in bhumispars’u-mudrd, the foreﬁnger just touching the edge of the
grass covering of the throne. On his right, Mara, defaced, is about to draw his sword from its
scabbard. He no longer wears the dress of a barbarian warrior, but only a dhotr' and a scarf
over his left shoulder. Of his demon army, only a headless naked ﬁgure in the background and
a curious dog—like animal standing on its hind legs, its back against the left edge of the panel,
are preserved. Cf. no. 196 infra. By the right shoulder of the Buddha is a beardless Vajrapini
with vajru in left hand. Of phyllite. Height 7-8 in. Kn. ’31—149; octagonal chamber, AI;
5 ft. below surface. Cf. pp. 328—9 supra. (Pl. 219, no. 105.)

106. Bust of one of Mara’s demon army, from a relief depicting Mara’s attack. The head of
the ﬁgure is turned Violently in line with and resting on the left shoulder. The rough hair is
brushed up above the forehead and the coarse whiskers and beard, the wide staring eyes,
heavy eyebrows, thick lips, broad heavy nose and knitted brows are in keeping with its demoniac
character. The chest is bare save for a crossed breast—chain passing over the shoulders and
connected in the centre of the chest by a circular medallion, embellished with a ﬁve-petalled
rose. Cf. The Monuments of Sdﬁchz', Pl. XXIX. A fracture on the left side of the top of the head
indicates the loss of some ornament or knot of hair. Of phyllite. Height 4-75 in. Cf. p. 251
supra; A.S.R. (1912), P1. VII, 17, I. Dh. ’12—959; east of L; 7 ft. 8 in. below surface. (Pl. 217,
no. 106.)

107. Head of a barbarian ﬁgure from a relief. The face is turned right and, though less
ferocious than that of the foregoing, the rough hair, beard, drooping moustache and coarse
features make certain its identiﬁcation as one of Mara’s warriors. Of phyllite. Height 4 in.
Dh. ’12—1,118; between D3 and L; 8 ft. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra.

108, a—m. Group of small miscellaneous heads, broken off from various reliefs and
comprising heads of the Buddha, Bodhisattva, Indra, Vajrapani, lay worshippers and members
of Mara’s demon army. The laymen wear turbans of various types, Indra his characteristic
high head-dress. Cf. nos. 149, 150 infra. Vajrapani is of the bearded Jovian type, while Mara’s
demon attendant has a ﬂat topknot with straggling locks falling over the ears. Dh. ’13—503.

109. Head of phyllite, from a relief. The hair is dressed close to the head; the face is clean-
shaven save for a moustache with drooping ends. Nose, lips and chin are damaged but the
modelling is vigorous and the whole not displeasing. Despite the absence of the usual demoniac
features, the face appears to be that of a barbarian, at least in the sense of being that of amleccha.
Height 5-25 in. Dh. ’12—C 156.

110. A false gable-window with legends depicted in three panels. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 75,
183, 193, 458-

(a) The top panel is framed in an ogee arch voluted at the springing. Running round the
outer edge of the frame is a saw—tooth moulding, and round the inner edge a beading. The
incident represented in this panel is the descent of the Buddha at Sankas’ya from the Traya—
strims’a heaven. In the centre the Buddha stands, facing, right hand upraised in abhaya-
mudru'. On his right are Indra and an attendant with hands clasped in adoration, and behind
them, in the upper background, Vajrapani. On the Buddha’s left are Brahma and an attendant,
both with ﬂowing locks in similar attitudes of adoration, and behind them one of Brahma’s
entourage. Of the triple ladder of the descent there is no indication. It may be noted that the
texts and both Fa Hien and Hsiian Tsang state that Indra was on the left side of the Buddha,
but his characteristic head-dress (cf. nos. 147—50 infra) leaves no doubt as to his identiﬁcation
here on the Buddha’s right. Between this panel and the central one is a frieze with saw-tooth
mouldings on the lower and upper edges, and between them four small panels separated by
Indo—Corinthian pilasters; in each panel is a ﬁve-petalled ﬂower.

(1)) The centre panel is rectangular with a half—ogee wing at either end. In the rectangular
space is portrayed the ‘Presentation of the four bowls’, with the haloed Buddha seated