
CH. 25] STONE OBJECTS 493

CLASS XIV. Trays (nos. 62—97)

Nearly all the articles under this head belong to the class of round toilet-trays
usually divided into two or more compartments and embellished with ﬁgures or
scenes sculptured in relief. Besides this impOrtant series of toilet—trays there are
a few miniature trays of rock-crystal, emanating from the Bhir Mound, which in
all probability were also meant for the toilet table, and a larger tray of hornblende
micaceous schist from Sirkap, which was used no doubt for household purposes.

Type a. Toilet-trays. The ornamental toilet—trays are made of schist, steatite,
indurated claystone, slate or phyllite. Of the thirty-three specimens described
below, thirteen are of grey schist, eleven of micaceous schist, ﬁve of steatite, two
of indurated claystone, one of slate, and one of phyllite or phyllitic slate. No. 64,
which is probably of the Saka period, is of steatite, but with this exception all of
pre—Parthian date are of schist.

The subjects portrayed in these toilet-trays are not numerous. They comprise

the followmg: Subject No. of specimens
(1) ‘Satyr and nymph . . . . . . . . . . I
(2) Figure reclining on couch attended by femalesI 2
(3) Drinking and dancing scenes . . . . . . . . 2
(4) Pair of ﬁgures (male and female) holding drinking-cups . 5

(5) Lions, leogryphs, winged stag, hippocamps and other ﬁsh-tailed monsters

with riders . . . . . . . . . . . 6
(6) Ditto, without riders . . . . . . . . . . I4
(7) Geometric and ﬂoral designs . . . . . . . . 3

Most of these subjects are clearly Hellenistic, and there can be no doubt that
this kind of toilet-tray was introduced with Hellenistic culture from the West,
where specimens of them have been found, especially in Egypt.2

Local Indian inﬂuence, however, is to be seen in the lotus rosettes or leaves
used as a background for many of the reliefs, in the makam-like treatment of some
of the sea-monsters, and possibly also in the pairs of ﬁgures holding drinking—cups,
though, as to the last, it is perhaps more likely that this motif, so familiar in the
early Mathura School, may also have had a Hellenistic origin.

In point of style no. 62, which comes from the Graeco-Bactrian city, has a
distinctive character of its own, which apart from its place of ﬁnding would justify
us in assigning it to the second century B.C. Instead of this tray being divided up,
as nearly all the later examples are, into two or more compartments, the two
ﬁgures occupy the centre of the ﬁeld and stand out with effective simplicity against
the plain background. The ﬁgures themselves are treated almost as if they were in
the round, rather than in relief,3 and the modelling of their forms, albeit sketchy,

‘ The same subject is also represented on the lid of the vessel no. 106 infra.

2 E.g. Flinders Petrie, Objects of Daily Use, Pl. XXXIV, nos. 23—31.
3 This characteristic of most Hellenistic relief work is shared also by the reliefs round the abacus

of the Asoka capital at Sarnath, which, as I have shown elsewhere, was executed by a Greek or a
Perso-Greek artist of the third century B.C. Cf. C.H.I. vol. I, p. 621, and Marshall and Foucher,
The Monuments of Sﬁﬁchi, pp. 87, 88.

MT 63