
General
remarks on
household and
toilet vessels,
etc.

488 STONE OBJECTS [CH. 25

28. Sk. ’14—844. This is a later example of the ﬁfth century AD. from the Kunala monastery.
The surfaces between the two stones, instead of being curved, slope downwards in a straight
line to the outside; there is a projecting boss on the upper stone round the central hole, and
towards this boss the top surface of the upper stone has a gentle slope. This mill is also made
of Taraki grey sandstone and has a slightly bigger diameter (16-62 in.) than no. 27, but it is
provided with a socket—hole for one handle only. Possibly the changes introduced in the shapes
of the stones and other details had tended to reduce the friction and so lessen the labour.
(Pls. 140, 1; I43, 12.)

29. The third grinding-mill illustrated on Pl. 140 is of a heavier type. It comes from the
Pippala monastery (Pl. ’21—38) and probably dates from the ﬁfth century AD. In diameter
(13 in.) it is smaller than the two preceding examples, but the stones are more ponderous, and
it is made of hard dark grey quartzite instead of the softer sandstone. Three other noticeable
differences are: ﬁrst, that the surface of the nether-stone is concave (instead of straight, as in
no. 28, or convex, as in no. 27); secondly, that crossing the upper stone from side to side is
a deep groove into which a stout piece of wood could be ﬁxed horizontally, with a handle
projecting on either side; thirdly, that the hole in the nether-stone into which the centre pivot

was ﬁxed is not pierced through the entire thickness of the stone but sunk to rather less than
half its thickness. (P1. 14.0, m.)

Type b. Crushing-mills. This type of mill, which was also introduced at T axila
during the Saka-Parthian period, was designed probably for the crushing and
grinding of harder substances (e.g. chunam) than ordinary grain. It is made of hard
quartzite instead of sandstone ; the diameter is smaller (about I I in. only) ; the nether—
stone is conical at the top ; and the upper stone takes the form of a deep heavy cylinder,
concave below so as to ﬁt on to the top of the nether-stone, and with a funnel-shaped
hole above. Across its top is a deep groove, as in no. 29, to take the wooden handle-
piece, the latter being pierced with a hole in its centre into which ﬁtted the iron
pivot of the nether-stone.

30. Sk. ’24—14 and 268; Block B; sq. 36- 57’; stratum II. Crushing-mill of quartzite in two
pieces (height 21-5 in.; diam. 108 in.), with centre pivot of iron still ﬁxed into the nether-stone.
See drawing on Pl. 140, s, and photos on Pl. 143, e, f, g.

3 I. Sk. ’12; Trench’A 461; stratum II. Similar, of quartzite (height 16- 5 in.; diam. I 1-5 in.),
with iron pivot still attached to nether-stone, but in this specimen the nether-stone is not so
high as in no. 30.

Vessels made of stone are relatively few in the earlier Bhir Mound cities and are
restricted to those of simple shapes—mortars (with pestles), dishes, saucers, bowls
and cups. The stones used for them are the hard abrz' (lower cretaceous shell lime-
stone) and hornblende-gneiss, soft steatite and alabaster, and the semi-precious
rock crystal and agate. Of alabaster there is only one example—a saucer of pinkish-
white colour, no. 42. Abri and hornblende-gneiss were used during this early
period for pestles and mortars; alm' also for cups and bowls; steatite (soapstone)
for bowls and dishes; crystal for little toilet-trays; and agate for ornamental bowls,
of which there is only one example. These stones were usually turned on the lathe,
but sometimes ground down by hand. -

Schist, as already indicated, was not introduced at Taxila until after the advent
of the Bactrian Greeks (c. 190 B.C.); but from that time onwards this soft stone