
CH. 25] STONE OBJECTS 489

came more and more into vogue, ﬁrst for simple articles like dishes and carved
toilet-trays, but later on for a multitude of vessels and sculptures of all sorts. The
earliest objects made of this stone are the two lathe—turned dishes nos. 38 and 39,
and the two ornamental toilet-trays nos. 62 and 63,. all four of which are referable
to the second century B.C. Later on, in the ﬁrst century A.D., we ﬁnd schist being
used for vases of many shapes, goblets, caskets, ladles and lamps, besides unguent-
bottles and elaborately carved toilet—trays. The three kinds of schist employed for
these articles are the common grey schist of Gandhara, and a micaceous and

hornblende schist from the same region; quartz mica-schist and the deep green
chloritised mica-schist, favoured at this period by the sculptors of the North-West,
were not used for household articles.

Other soft stones employed during this period were steatite, phyllite, slate, claye
stone and alabaster, but so far as Sirkap is concerned, no household objects made of
these stones have been found in strata earlier than the Parthian, and even then their
use is restricted to a few articles—mainly toilet—trays and caskets. Specimens made of
phyllite, slate, claystone and alabaster are very few; those of steatite are not so rare.

During the Kushan period phyllite, as we shall see, was to become the favourite
stone for sculpture, and other objects were to be made from it as well as from the other
soft stones named above, which continued in use up to the early medieval period.

With the introduction of schist for household vessels in the second century B.C.,
hard stones like gneiss and hornblende gradually ceased to be used for this purpose.
Apart from pestles and mortars, for which particularly hard Varieties of stone are
needed, only one example (no. 43) of a hard stone vessel has been found in Sirkap,
and there is reason for believing that this was a survival from one of the earlier
settlements.

In regard to the use of agate for small bowls, cups, caskets, etc., the fragments of
these vases found at Taxila correspond very closely with Pliny’s description of the
famous vasa myrrhina, which fetched such big prices at Rome. Pliny alleges that
these vases came from Parthia and Carmania, but no importance need be attached
to his statement, because, up to the time when the Red Sea route was opened up,
the carrying trade between India and the West was exclusively in the hands of the

Parthians, and it is hardly likely that the precise provenance of some of the goods -

would be known to the Romans.I The manufacture of agate vases is an age-old
industry in India, especially in Kathiawar and round about the gulf of Cambay,
and there can be little doubt that it was from there that the Parthian merchants
exported them to Italy. On the strength of a line of Propertius,2 it has been inferred
(e.g. Ramsay and Lanciani, Manual of Roman Antiquities, p. 4.97), that the myrrhine
vases must have been some sort of porcelain, but the foci referred to by Propertius
were not ordinary kilns but the special trenched kilns in Which it was the Indian
practice to roast agates and carnelians in order to bring out their colours. This
process of burning agates was fully described by Barbosa as far back as I 517. Cf.
Sir G. Watt, Commercial Products of India, p. 561, and Schoff, Periplus, pp. 193—4.

‘ Schoff, Peri lus, . I . ‘ ‘Murrea ue in Parthis ocula cocta focis’ IV, v, 26 .
P P 94- q P