
CH. 26] STUCCO SCULPTURES 517

eyelids, edges of nostrils and hair, and wrinkles of the neck, forehead and ear—lobes.
Black or grey-black was used for the hair, eyebrows, and pupils of the eyes. In
some ﬁgures of atlantes, however, red instead of black is found on the hair, beard
and moustache; and red was also used on the robes of the Buddha and for indicating
the wheels (one of the mahdpurusha laksltazzas) on the soles of his feet. It is to be
noted, however, that in some cases the red colouring on face and garments served
only as a groundwork for gilding, which time has since destroyed. In attempting,
therefore, to visualise these stucco ﬁgures in their pristine beauty, we must
remember always to take into account the polychromy and gilding with which they
were freely embellished.

Let it be added that moulds were used on occasion by the sculptors of TaXila,
as they were used also by the sculptors of Central Asia, but with one signal
difference; for whereas the latter endeavoured to get the entire front View of the
head, including head-dress and ears, out of a simple mould and were compelled in
consequence to ﬂatten the faces of their ﬁgures, the artists of TaXila were content
to employ the mould merely for the most difﬁcult part of the head, Viz. the mask,
leaving the remaining parts—ears, hair, head-dress and neck—to be executed by
hand, and thus achieving an altogether more varied and artistic result.

The following are the respective sites where the sculptures described below
were unearthed. The precise ﬁndspot of each is given in the catalogue itself.

Sirkap, Block B: no. II; Block D: nos. I—Io, Mohra Moradu: nos. 30—8.

I2—29. Jauliaﬁ: nos. 39—71.
Dharmaraj‘ika: nos. 72—8 5. Kalawan: nos. 86—96.
Giri: nos. 97, 98. Bhamala: nos. 99—102.

GROUP A. STUCCO‘SCULPTURES OF THE PARTHIAN PERIOD
(Cf- ch. 5, pp- 154—50
CLASS I. Sculptures in the Hellenistic style (nos. 1, 2)

1. One of the bestexamples of sculptures in this style is the bearded head, no. I, from the
apsidal temple D in Sirkap=Sk. ’13~2,o43; sq. 56-63’; stratum II. The head, of which the
height is 8-12 in., is that of a typical Greek satyr, with pointed ears, broad ﬂat nose, moustache,
beard and free-ﬂowing locks. There is nothing mechanical or crude about the workmanship.
The features are modelled with feeling, and there is an intensity of expression in the knitted
brows and half-parted lips and a boldness in the treatment of the hair and beard that bespeak
a thorough mastery over the material, but at the same time a proper understanding of its
L” limitations. The strong, almost portrait-like individuality that characterises the countenance
is typical of Greek art in its later phases; it is never found in early Indian art; nor is it a
characteristic of the Gandhara School. With this and the following head the reader should
compare the little head of Dionysus in silver repoussé ﬁgured in P1. 209, a, which is equally
characteristic of Hellenistic craftsmanship. A.S.R. (1912), P1. XVII, c. (P1. 14.8, no. I.)

2. Another head in the Hellenistic style, is that ﬁgured in P1. I48, no. 2. (Sk. ’13—2,o65;
sq. 5 5-62’; stratum II; height 4- 5 in.). It, too, is bearded, but the heard in this instance is
treated in simpler masses, and there is a quiet dignity and repose about the features that ﬁnd

MT 66

 

Use of moulds

 

 

i
t
l
i
l
l
1
l
l
E
E
i