
516 sTUcco SCULPTURES [(3H, 26

Some are as beautiful as any examples of the sculptor’s art found in India; others
are crude and spiritless efforts, which have little claim to be called art at all. But
the differences between them are due, less to the progress or decay of art, than to
the varying skill or idiosyncrasies of their authors. To take but one example,
namely, the reliefs on the south side of the Mohra Moradu Stﬁpa, we know that
all these reliefs belong to the same period. Of this there can be no reasonable
doubt. But if we had not known this, and if the ﬁgures of which they are composed
had not been found in situ, we might well have concluded that the coarse and nerve—
; less reliefs in the outer bays belonged to a more decadent phase in the history of the
Indo—Afghan School than the magniﬁcent group in the fourth bay. Until, then, 1
1 further and more precise evidence comes to light, it is clear that we must beware

1 of using the style of these sculptures as a criterion of their age, and be content,

1 meanwhile, to treat them all as belonging to one indivisible group} notwithstanding

1 that they vary greatly in style and merit.

g1 and their As to the technique of these sculptures, the bodies, legs and arms of the larger

‘ te‘ihmque ﬁgures were usually composed of soft kaﬁjﬁr stone and mud, covered with a thick

1 coat of the same coarse and friable plaster with which the walls were faced. On the ‘
1 other hand, the heads were made of a ﬁner and more lasting kind of plaster, and l
l

3

l

i

then mortised into the neck, sometimes with a piece of wood to strengthen the
joint, sometimes without. Thanks partly to their shape and partly to the stronger
material of which they were made, the heads were naturally able to resist the 1
pressure of the fallen debris or the percolation of rain-water better than the bodies; ‘
and this explains why, on many sites on the North-West Frontier, the heads un-
earthed have far outnumbered the bodies and led some excavators to infer that
heads alone may sometimes have been set up on the walls of the shrines. From the
excavations at Taxila it is now clear that this inference was mistaken, and that
originally the number of heads was equal to the number of bodies. This observation
is true of smaller as well as larger ﬁgures, but the bodies of the former are usually
composed of plaster throughout and are proportionably stronger than the bodies
of the latter. In the case of the smaller reliefs,2 the entire body was separately
modelled and then impaled on a stick and so afﬁxed to the still fresh coating of i
plaster on the wall; and even the tolerably large ﬁgures on the plinth of stﬁpa A I 5
at Jauliaﬁ seem to have been treated in this way. In the modelling of the ﬁgure, ‘
a common practice seems to have been to work the plaster freely into shape with
. the boasting tool, and then to ﬁnish it off, when dry, with a chisel. This procedure,
however, was by no means invariable. Many of the reliefs, especially the smaller
g ones, retain a ﬁne slip of lime or shell plaster, which was applied before the ﬁnal .
deﬁnition was given to the features, and it is evident from the ﬁne lines impressed ’l
with a modelling tool round the nostrils, etc., that the paste below the slip must
have been still moist when the latter was applied. The slip itself was white or
cream coloured. Red was commonly used to pick out the lips, edges and folds of

 

I On this subject, see also The Stﬁpas and Monasteries at yauliﬁﬁ, pp. 37—8. l
2 Ibid. P1. XIX, a, b.

   

i
it
i}
i
a