
524 srucco SCULPTURES [on 26

ﬁgures also, were once bedecked. All ﬁve ﬁgures are of lime plaster, on a core of kaﬁjﬁr, rubble
and clay. In style they are not on a par with the reliefs in the fourth bay of the main stﬁpa at
Mohra Moradu (p. 521 supra), and the attendant ﬁgures are especially stiff and formal, but
the central ﬁgure of the Buddha is an impressive example of the conventional images of this
period and the ﬁnest, in a complete state, at TaXila. Soon after its discovery this group was
shattered to bits by a fanatic, but reconstructed with inﬁnite skill and unwearying patience by
my assistant, Mr M. Gupta. Cf. p. 377 supra; ju. Mem. Pl. XIII, 1). (Pl. 155, a.)

40. In. ’27~»F 586. Seated colossal Buddha in the dhya'nu—mudrd, occupying the bay between
a pair of pilasters on the south face of the main stﬁpa opposite to stﬁpa A11. Four smaller
ﬁgures of the Buddha, one in the s’ikslzd— and the others in the dhydna—mudrd, are seated, one
above the other, on lotuses, on the faces of the pilasters. All of these ﬁgures, large and small,
belong to the ﬁfth century A.D. The central image, like all such large images of this period, is
composed of a core of large blocks of kaﬁjﬁr stone covered with clay, and ﬁnished with a thick
coating of lime stucco. 'I‘he workmanship is rough and the style mechanical. (Pl. I 54, a.)

41. In. A15. A row of Buddhas in the attitude of Meditation, seated side by side on the
plinth of stﬁpa A I 5. This is probably one of the earliest of the smaller stﬁpas at Jauliaﬁ, and
it’is not unlikely that the form of decoration found here represents an earlier stage than that
found in most of the neighbouring stapes (eg. I) I, D4, A16), but, if this is so, the images of
the Buddha must have been remade in the ﬁfth century A.D. since it is quite certain that,
as they stand, they are among the latest reliefs on the site, being both stereotyped in style and
coarse in workmanship. Cf. p. 372 supra. (Pl. I 5 5, b.)

42. In. ’I7—F 589; east face of stﬁpa Ari. Height 23 in. Stucco image of the Bodhisattva
Maitreya, in the attitude of Meditation, holding an unguent~ﬂask in the ﬁngers of his left hand.
Wears ear-pendants, necklaces and bangles. The state of preservation is excellent, but the
modelling is mechanical and the features heavy and soulless. As a rule, Maitreya is seated in
European fashion, and is seldom portrayed in the dhydna—mudrd. Cf. p. 373 supra. (Pl. I 55, d.)

B. Small Sculptures in situ. Nos. 43—8 (cf. ch. 20, pp. 372—3). These are found on
a large class of stﬁpas at Jauliaﬁ and elsewhere. The stﬁpas commonly have a square
base, circular drum, dome and a range of umbrellas, but from most of them the super-
structure has now perished and the bases only remain. The latter are generally divided
into three horizontal tiers, diminishing in width and height as they ascend, and divided
one from the other by dentil cornices. The principle of decoration is the same for all
three tiers; it consists of a series of stunted pilasters with shallow niches between
them. In the two lower tiers the pilasters are usually in the debased Corinthian
style; in the uppermost, in the debased Persepolitan. The niches are in the form
either of a trefoil arch or of a portal with sloping jambs, which was the form in
fashion at this time for the doorways of monastery cells. These two forms of niches
alternate with one another on the faces of the stﬁpas, both horizontally and verti-
cally. Within the niches are seated Buddhas or Bodhisattvas—the former in the
attitude either of Meditation or of Teaching; on either side of the niches, between
them and the pilasters, are pairs of ﬁgures bringing offerings to or worshipping the
Buddha. In order to increase the height of the two lower tiers without diminishing
the number of niches, an extra row of ﬁgures was added at their base. Inthe lowest
tiers these ﬁgures commonly consisted of the forefronts of lions alternating with
atlantes, which are shown supporting the weight of the superstructure above them.
In the second tier the lions were frequently replaced by elephants.

 

5.9.1,... weaned“?

0“ raw“. ». .. ,. A... w