
“.1,

 

CH. 27] IRON OBJECTS 547

a

Type 6:

71. Socketed conical spear—butt, with horizontal rim. Length 6 in. Mm. ’15—E64; ﬁfth
century A.D. Cf. p. 363 (19) supra. (Pl. 164, no. 71.)

CLASS XX. Arrow—heads (nos. 72w89)

Without exception, all the arrow—heads found at Taxila were intended for shafts
made of reeds, not of solid wood, and were provided accordingly with long tangs
instead of hollow sockets.I But a peculiarity of nearly all the earlier specimens is
that there is a considerable length of solid shank intervening between the head and
the tang. The explanation of this unusual feature seems to be that this type of
arrow-head is a compromise between the socketed and tanged varieties. Whoever
its authors may have been, they had «evidently been accustomed to socketed piles
designed for solid wooden shafts, and when, for some reason or other, reeds were
substituted for the solid wood, the old form of pile was retained and a thin tang
added behind the shank for insertion into the reed, the shank itself being made
solid instead of hollow. Since the reed arrow was in general use among Iranian
and Central Asian2 as well as Indian peoples, it is reasonable to infer that these
‘double-tanged’ heads, as we may call them, were an adaptation of a Western
sdcketed type rather than an Eastern one, and, this being so, it seems not improbable
that they were introduced at Taxila by the Bactrian Greeks. In support of this
surmise it is to be noted-that the earliest specimens come from the uppermost
stratum of the Bhir Mound and are therefore contemporary with the advent of the
Bactrian Greeks. No iron arrow—heads of any kind have been found in the earlier
settlements on this site,3 although they must, of course, have been in use.

Apart from their double tang, the arrow-heads from the Bhir Mound belong
to ﬁve different types, Viz.: (a) ﬂat, with lozenge cross-section; (b) with triangular
cross—section; (c) with square cross-section; (a0 with rhombic cross-section;
(e) barbed. With the exception of (b) all these types recur in the later settlements
in Sirkap, but in the Saka—Parthian period (ﬁrst century 3.0. to ﬁrst century A.D.)
two new types also make their appearance, viz.: (f) conical, and (g) three—bladed.
The older types of arrow—heads also tend to become larger, e.g. nos. 77, 78, 84.
In the ﬁfth century A.D. an eighth type (h) with four barbed blades was introduced.4

1 Indian arrows seem to have been Usually made of the s’ara reed, but arrows made of bambu (veﬂu)
and s’ala‘ka (a hard wood) are also mentioned in Indian literature, e.g. Kautilya, Arthas’astra, bk. 11,
ch. I3; Agni Parana, 245, 12.

2 Cf. Excavations at Dura-Europos, 6th season (1932—3), p. 454, and notes 48 and 49; Stein,
Innermost Asia, I, pp. 95—6; III, Pls. VI, XXVI, XLVII; Serindia, Iv, Pls. LI, LIII, etc. The Indian
reed—arrow was from two to three cubits in length. Cf. Q. Curtius, VIII, 9; Arrian, Ind. c. 16;

Strabo, XV, 66.

3 For a double-tanged arrow-head with three blades from Turfan (Kara-khoja), see Stein, op. cit.
II, p. 608, Kao IV, OI and vol. III, Pl. LXXI. The author, however, does not attempt to explain the
peculiarity of the type.

4 Ancient Indian literature refers to arrow-heads of many shapes, e.g. ardhacandra (‘ half-moon ’),
kshurapra (with a razor-edge), sﬁcimukha (needle—shaped), vatsa-danta (like a calf’s tooth), etc. Cf.

j.A.O.S. XIII, pp. 275—81.