
Abundance
and purity of
Indian iron

High quality

of Indian steel
in ancient and
medieval times

Analysis of
specimens
from Taxila
and Besnagar

 

534. IRON OBJECTS [0H, 27

others the inﬂuence of the Sakas, Parthians and White Huns. Carpenter’s and
blacksmith’s tools and agricultural implements (Groups D and E) were least
likely, perhaps, to be affected by foreign innovations, but it is noteworthy that even
among them scissors (no. I 3 5) and the spade (no. 198) made their ﬁrst appearance
at Taxila in the ﬁrst century A.D., about the same time that they did in the
Mediterranean area.

Probably in no country of the world is iron found more abundantly than in
India, and in» none are the ores from which it is extracted of greater purity or more
easily accessible. Once, therefore, that the use of iron had been discovered and
its advantages over copper and its alloys proved, Indians could have had little
difﬁculty in obtaining adequate supplies of the metal. Indeed, the sources from
which it might have been traded to T axila are so many, that there would be small
purpose in naming them. From a very early period India was famous for the
high quality of its iron and steel. Thus Ktesias, who was at the court of Persia in
the ﬁfth century 13.0., mentions two remarkable swords of Indian steel presented
to him by the king of Persia and his mother, and it has been plausibly sug-
gested that the fermm candidum of which the Malloi presented a hundred
talents’ weight to Alexander the Great, was the same metal. Again, the Periplus
informs us that in the ﬁrst century A.D. Indian iron and steel were being ex—
ported from Ariaca (Gulf of Cambay and thereabouts) to Abyssinia, and ferrnm
Indicum also ﬁgures in the lists of dutiable articles under Marcus Aurelius and
Commodus. Salmasius, too, speaks of a Greek treatise (now lost) on the tempering
of Indian steel.

Of the fame enjoyed by Indian steel in medieval and later times there is no less
evidence. Writing in the twelfth century, Idrisi says: ‘ The Hindus excel in the

[ manufacture of iron. They have also workshops wherein are forged the most

famous sabres in the world. It is impossible to ﬁnd anything to surpass the edge
that you get from Indian steel.’ In the following century Marco Polo speaks of
iron and ondanique in the markets of Kerman, and the latter has been recognised
by Yule as a corruption of the Persian hundwa'niy (=Indian steel), which was used
for the far-famed sword blades of Kerman. Tavernier, again (1605—80), writes:
‘The steel susceptible of being damascened comes from the kingdom of Golconda;
it is met with in commerce in lumps about the size of a halfpenny cake; they are
cut in two in order to see whether they are of good quality, and each makes half
the blade of a sabre.’ (Cf. McCrindle, Ancient India, its invasion by Alexander the
Great, p. 252 and n. I; Schoff, The Periplus of the Erythrcean Sea, ch. 6, pp. 24,
70, I72; Neogi, Iron in Ancient India, pp. 66—8; Marco Polo (ed. Yule), bk. I,
ch. XVII; Tavernier (ed. Ball), 1, 157.)

The literary evidence as to the excellence of ancient Indian iron and steel has
been fully corroborated by the analysis and micro—examination of selected speci-
mens from TaXila and Besnagar. The latter, which appear to have been pieces of
a broken sword used as wedges by the engineers when they were setting up the
Khambaba pillar of Heliodorus (c. 100 3.0.), and in the opinion of the late Sir

‘ .Wmawmvwwkwamme.mmmmwmmmmmwmmm “Mnmpmmm;m-MvmwwrﬁwwuwwMeWM\mWWMRme‘w