
CH. 27] IRON OBJECTS 535

Robert Hadﬁeld must have been deliberately manufactured as steel,I yielded the

following analysis:
C Si S P Mn Fe

07 0-04 0-008 0-02 002 99-3

The ten specimens from Taxila, which have also been examined for me by the same
eminent authority, are described in the Table below. Three of them (nos. 1, 2, 5)
show a very high carbon percentage, between 1-2 and 17 % (which is about double
that of the Khambaba specimens), and leave no doubt that high carbon steel was
being knowingly made as such at this period in India. On the other hand, it is
a matter of surprise that these specimens show no signs of having been tempered.
The absence of such tempering in a single or even in two specimens might perhaps
be explained on the hypothesis that they were newly made and unused and for that
reason had not yet been tempered, but this explanation could hardly be true of all
three specimens, and we must therefore conclude that the makers of these objects
were either ignorant of the process of tempering or did not think it necessary to
temper steel of such high quality. Seeing, however, how close were the relations
at this time between Taxila and the Western world, it seems scarcely possible that
the art of tempering could have been unknown there.

As to the process by which this ancient steel was produced, it was probably the
same as that by which the celebrated wootz steel is still produced—or was, at any
rate, being produced until a recent date———in the South of India. In this process,
which is known as ‘cementation’, wrought iron is ﬁrst obtained by the direct
method, viz. by heating the ores of iron with charcoal in small blast furnaces (the
blast being produced by means of hand-bellows) without the intermediate forma—
tion of cast iron. ‘The wrought iron is then cut into small pieces and placed in
crucibles along with certain kinds of wood and leaves of plants, and then heated
in charcoal blast furnaces with the lids closed. The blast is continued from four to
six hours, when the steel is obtained in a molten condition. Water is then sprinkled
or poured on the metal, Which is thus hardened on being quenched and the steel is
obtained in a crystalline condition.’ (Neogi, Iron in Ancient India, p. 72. Cf. also
Dar. et Sag. so. ‘Ferrum’, p. 1093, and for further particulars of the process,
Heyne, Tracts on India, historical and statistical, p. 359; Buchanan, Travels from
Madras through Mysore, etc., vol. I, pp. 118, 306; vol. II, pp. 20, 118, 308; Percy,
Metallurgy, vol. 11, p. 778.)

Tavernier’s remarks quoted above about Indian steel being traded in lumps ‘ of
the size of a halfpenny cake’, agree with what H. G. Graves says concerning the
blooms used for forging the iron beams at Konarak, which according to his
measurements averaged some 6 in. in length by 1—2 in. in cross-section and weighed
from three to four pounds,2 but it is to be noted that the latter are of iron, not of
steel. The 108 ingots found in Sirkap and described below (nos. 217—20) are of
much the same size and weight, averaging about 5-4 X 1-4 in. and weighing from
1% to 4 lb.

1 Cf. A.S.R. (1913—14), pp. 203—4. 2 Neogi, op. cit. p. 48.
68-2

Process
employed in
production of
steel