
s,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Chapter 24. TERRA—GOTTA 3,1511)
CLAY OBJECTS

N ancient India, as in most other countries, clay was used for the fashioning

of manifold other objects besides household pottery. At Taxila, these

objects included sacred and mundane ﬁgurines, ex—voto reliefs, toy carts and

animals, rattles, whistles, playing-dice, personal and other ornaments, ritual
tanks, and—most important of all—~a number of remarkably ﬁne groups of Bud-
dhist ﬁgures, some of superhuman size. Many of these objectswparticularly the
smaller ones and those liable to rough handling—were baked in kilns and so con-
verted into terra-cotta, but many others, and perhaps the majority, were merely
dried in the sun and left in a crude state, though in that case their surfaces were
generally ﬁnished off with a slip and coloured. This widespread use of unbaked
clay is a fact that has generally escaped the notice of archaeologists for the simple
reason that objects made of this material are very destructible, and only a minute
fraction of them has survived the lapse of the centuries. It is a fact, however, that
needs to be borne in mind by anyone attempting to reconstruct the history of
Indian plastic art; for being, as it was, the cheapest, most readily accessible, and
most perfect medium for modelling, clay inevitably exercised a strong inﬂuence on
all classes of sculpture, whether the material employed was stone, wood, metal or
stucco. This might no doubt have been inferred, by analogy, from the history of
plastic art in other countries, but at TaXila it is now clearly demonstrated by the
groups of clay ﬁgures brought to light in the Buddhist monasteries, which, at their
best, show a freedom and freshness of modelling never quite equalled in other
materials and leave us in no doubt as to the outstanding importance of work in
clay.

The groups in question belong exclusively to the Indo-Afghan School, which
ﬂourished in the fourth and ﬁfth centuries A.D., but there is evidence to show
that ﬁgures of this kind were not restricted to that particular school. Thus,
Cunningham records that in the great apsidal temple in Sirkap, which was built
and destroyed in the ﬁrst century A.D., he found a number of colossal seated
images of burnt clay ‘similar to those which are seen all over Burma’.I Such
images could not, of course, have been baked in a kiln, and we may safely assume
that the burning was done by the ﬁre which destroyed the temple, just as it was in
the case of many of the clay ﬁgures at Kalawan, Iauliaﬁ, etc. Even apart, however,
from this positive evidence, it is obvious that the peculiar circumstances to which
these clay ﬁgures owe their preservation, namely, a general conﬂagration followed
by the abandonment of the burnt-out buildings in which they stood, are seldom

‘ C.S.R. 11 (1862—5), p. 127. See alsoysupra, pp. 151—2.

Figures of
sun-dried clay