
Dharmarajika
Stﬁpa nos.
164—72

 

468 TERRAuCOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS [CH. 24

and it might reasonably be inferred, therefore, that the latter were a novelty
introduced by the Parthians. Against this inference, however, there are two un-
answerable arguments. The ﬁrst is that some broken tankushrines of the same
kind were found by the writer as far east as Bhita near Allahabadmin the heart
of Hindustan, where the Parthians never penetrated.I The second is that the idols
in the tank—shrines were of a type familiar in India from prehistoric times and such
as were still, in the ﬁrst century A.D., quite in keeping with popular ideas, but not
such as foreign invaders from the West, whether Parthian, Scythian or Greek,
are likely to have manufactured.

CLASS XXIV. Buddhist term-cotta and clay ﬁgures (ans. I64M87)

We come now to a class of terra~cotta and clay figures which are exclusively
Buddhist in character and altogether more impressive than the preceding examples.
In style, they are generally similar to the Buddhist stutter) sculptures described in
chapter 26, but thanks to the greater plasticity or clay as compared with stucco
and to the ease with which it can be handled, many of these ﬁgures shew a freedom
in their modelling and a sensitiveness to farm which was never quite attained in
stucco work. With a few rare exceptions, all these ﬁgures beleng to the Indra-Afghan
School of the fourth to ﬁfth century A.D., and comprise, as we shall see, several
pieces of surpassing merit. The smaller ﬁgures were usually of terra-cotta
throughout, that is, of clay ﬁred in a kiln. Of the larger ﬁgures, some were made
entirely of sun—dried clay; in others, the head was of terra—cotta, the rest of sun—
dried clay.

I64. Dh. ’13—493; from building L. Terra—cotta head with high topknot and wreath.
Height 5-62 in. That the Buddhists had already started making use of terra-cotta for their
images even before Kushan times is evident from this head (Pl. 138, a), which comes from the
Dharmarajika Stﬁpa and is so strikingly similar in size and in the character of its features—
notably, in its small mouth and nose and carelessly modelled eyes—to many of the stucco heads
from the apsidal temple in Sirkap, that there can be no doubt about its belonging to approxi-
mately the same age (middle of ﬁrst century A.D.), though the crude treatment of the wreath
and topknot suggest that it may be a little later. Cf. p. 251 supra.

As to the other terra-cotta heads from the Dharmarajika Stﬁpa, it is tempting
to see in the two ﬁne heads nos. I66 and 167, with their broad open features and
western type of countenance, evidence of a stronger Hellenistic inﬂuence than
is usual in the Indo-Afghan School, and, indeed, this was the View which I
myself took of these two heads, when I ﬁrst unearthed them at the Dharmarajika
Stﬁpa. But since then our knowledge of this School has vastly increased, and we
can now be perfectly conﬁdent in assigning them and all the following pieces,
except no. 187, to that School.

I65. Terra-cotta head from chapel D 5 at the Dharmarajika. Height 5-12 in. The hair,
which is parted above the forehead and tied in a topknot, is treated in unusually heavy masses,

‘ Cf. A.S.R. (1911—12), p. 76, nos. 47, 48, and P1. XXV.