
CH. 24] TERRA—GOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS 441

Saka-Parthian, but these are merely stray survivals from the Maurya period, picked
up in all probability amid the Bhir Mound ruins, where they are even now to be

found in large numbers. We are not, of course, to imagine that Indian terraucottas *

disappear altogether at this time. Whoever her foreign rulers might be—Maurya,
Greek, Saka or Parthian—Taxila had a fundamentally Indian culture, and the
articles in daily use among her people were predominantly Indian? Thus, in the
second century B.C. children continued to play with the same kinds of toy carts
and toy animals that they had played with in the third, and grown-ups with the
same kind of dice. But the toys were no longer quite so decorative as they had
been. Nowhere among them do we ﬁnd the pretty little stamped devices—rosettes,
lozenges, squares and the like—of which the Maurya craftsman was so fond (e.g.
Pl. 134, nos. 62 and 77). Indeed, with one small exception, the only terra-cottas
from Sirkap that have any pretensions to artistic merit are the purely Hellenistic
ﬁgurines such as nos. 30, 31 and 46—50. Some of these were probably produced
from imported moulds, but Western inﬂuence is also apparent in locally made
pieces like nos. 27, 34 and in the admirable orang—utan or gorilla, no. 53 ; and even
in some of the later ﬁgurines of the ‘Nude goddess’ type, like nos. 6, 7 and 8.
The exception referred to above is no. 42, which portrays a squatting kumbhdﬂda
holding an animal in his left arm. This is an effective piece of modelling in the style
of the later Sanchi School, and may in fact have been brought from Central India.
Whatever its place of origin, it was not Taxila.

Other features of a minor kind in which the Sirkap terra-cottas differ from,

those from the Bhir Mound are indicated in the catalogue below. Here we need
notice only the following novelties: (a) whistles (nos. 119, 120) make their ﬁrst
appearance in the Greek strata of Sirkap, and coin-moulds (nos. 149~ 5 2) and small
architectural pieces (nos. 1:26, 127) in the Saka~Parthian strata. (b) The circular
bowl type of ritual tank (nos. 3: 53, I 54), which, is found only in the Bhir Mound and
in the Greek strata of Sirkap, is replaced later bya square type, to some of which
a shrine and idol of the Mother or Earth goddess typeare attached (nos. 155—63).

A few small terra—cottas have also been found at the Dharmarajika and Jandial
C and D sites, but they are of little interest, consisting mainly of toy animals
and rattles. The following, however, are noteworthy: nos. 14 and 22, two votive
rilievos in the Maurya style; nos. 45, 50 and 136, a ﬁgurine, diminutive head and
medallion of Hellenistic origin; nos. I47 and 148, two moulds, one for a Buddha(?)
mask, the other for a ﬁgure of Ganga(P).

It remains to add a few more words about the unique groups of Buddhist
terra-cottas and clay ﬁgures from the Dharmarajika, Kalawan, Mohra Moradu and
Jauliaﬁ. The quality of these works of the Indo-Afghan School is variable, but the
best of them take rank among the ﬁnest examples of Indian plastic art known to us,
and along with their stucco counterparts I throw an entirely new light on one of the
most important and vital developments in the history of Indian art. It is necessary
to stress this the more, because it has been the fashion with several writers of

1 Cf. ch. 26, pp. 515 ff.

Terra-cottas
from Dharma-
rajiki and
Jandial C and
D

Buddhist clay
ﬁgures