
454 TERRA-GOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS [CH. 24

. 1 7o. Sk. ’29—I,965; Block B’; sq. 3 5-88’; stratum V. Toy bird of red terra-cotta, with ﬂat
body and broad tail. Length 3-62 in. A transverse hole through the breast for the axle of the
wheels, and another through the eyes for a string. Reddish buff clay. Triangular-shaped head.
(Pl. 134, no. 70.)

71. Sk.’ 29— 3,165; Block 1’ ; sq. 13- 92’; stratum VI. Similar to preceding. Length 3 75 in.
Body decorated with incised lines. (P1.134, no. 71. )

CLASS XVII. Toy animals without carts or wheels (nos. 72—107)

These comprise elephants, horses, humped bulls, a camel, dog(?), rams, wild
goats(?), birds and monkeys.

Elephants Terra-cotta elephants are found in both the Bhir Mound and Sirkap. Some have
riders, some not. Some are quite plain, others are provided with trappings, and
others, again, are adorned with stamped designs. As a rule, the earlier specimens
from the Bhir Mound are more ornamental than the later from Sirkap. No. 72,
however, from the Bhir Mound is quite plain, and no. 73 from the same site has
only a girth and neck ropes to relieve its plainness, but most of the Bhir Mound
specimens are embellished with a variety of small patterned squares or triangles or
circles or lozenges stamped on the surface of the head and trunk. One elephant
only of this class comes from Sirkap, viz. no. 75, and in this case there is only one
stamped device instead of several, and the workmanship has become noticeably
cruder. Some effort towards decoration has been made in the case of the Sirkap
elephant no. 76, but the ornament consists only of a row of incised circles to
indicate the girth, and a group of similar circlets on the head to indicate perhaps
the head—cloth.

The few examples of these elephants which carry riders come exclusively from
the Bhir Mound, and are easily recognisable from the peculiar way in which the
legs and seats of the riders are ﬂattened against the body of the elephants. Evi-
dently the toy-makers from TaXila had much greater diﬂiculty in giving the riders
a natural seat on the backs of these great beasts than the sculptors of Siﬁchi had.
Possibly they were not so much at home with the elephant as were their fellow
craftsmen of Central India and Hindustan. It is evident, too, that in the pre—Greek
period represented on the Bhir Mound these toy elephants were much greater
favourites than later on, when the Maurya rule had been replaced by the Yavana.

As regards technique, most of the elephants are solid throughout, but a few of
the largest ones from the Bhir Mound (e.g. nos. 78 and 79), like some of the largest
horses, have hollow bodies and legs. This is for the sake of lightness. Such speci—
mens are not very well modelled nor are they embellished with stamped designs.
With few exceptions, the clay is red and well-burnt but without any slip, though
in one or two of the better examples a wash has been applied to the surface.

Only rarely is the clay grey-black, e.g. in no. 76 and in the miniature elephants
nos. 80 and 81. The tusks are of one piece with the rest of the beast, not inserted,
as they sometimes are in other parts of India, into sockets. The eye is generally
diamond—shaped and stamped, but sometimes lozenge-shaped.