
Single female
ﬁgures

44.2 TERRA-GOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS [CH. 24

eminence on this subject to decry the work of the North-West from the Gandhara
period onwards, treating its productions as little more than pale and effete reﬂex—
ions of classical prototypes, and claiming for Hindustan and Central India virtually
the whole credit for the great outburst of formative art {which distinguished the
Gupta School. We know now from these remains at Taxilagthat, whatever Hellenistic
tradition may have lingered on into the ﬁfth century, the Indo-Afghan School was
anything but a mimetic one. It was conservative to the extent that it perpetuated
many of the orthodox forms of Buddhist imagery, but it was essentially a living
art, instinct with new energy and creative power, and it made most valuable
contributions to the later art of Hindustan and Central India.

The time when it may truly be said that art at Taxila was mainly an imitation of
Hellenistic art was during the Parthian period, and we have only to turn to the
stucco ﬁgures of that period from Sirkap to understand how degenerate Hellenistic
art could become in the hands of Indian imitators who had no creative genius of
their own. Three centuries later conditions had entirely changed: the sculptors of
the Indo-Afghan School were still making use here and there of Hellenistic motifs
and ideas, but only to assimilate them into the body of their own art, which in its
own way was just as original, forceful and independent as the Gupta art of Hindu—
stan and more so than contemporary Byzantine art in the West.

Some general remarks on the terra—cottas from the Bhir Mound will be found in
vol. I at pp. Io4-5, 108, III; and on those from Sirkap at pp. 127—8, 133, 203,
208—9. Other references are given in the individual entries of the catalogue below.

CLASS I. ‘Nude Mother’ or ‘Earth goddess’ type (nos. 1—8)

Type a. Primitive idol type.

I. Bm. ’20—717; sq. 47‘72'; stratum III. Miniature female ﬁgure of terra-cotta with buff
slip. Height 2-37 in. No arms; the legs end in a point immediately below the thighs, the
division between them being shown by lightly incised lines. The nose is pinched, as in pre-
historic ﬁgures, and round the neck is a series of bands or torques such as are also found on
ﬁgures of the Chalcolithic Age. These, as well as a hip-girdle and cross-straps in front of the
body, are shown by lightly incised lines. The hair, which falls down the back of the neck, is
square-cut and indicated by crossed lines. Behind the head, in the middle of the hair, is a
rosette, and three other rosettes on the top of the head. In the ears are rosette ear-rings. The
idol is probably of prehistoric date, having found its way by chance into the later ruins of the Bhir
Mound, but it is also possible that this and the four following ﬁgurines came from ritual tanks
of the kind described below (nos. I 53—63). Cf. the ﬁgures in Pl. 136, w and no (nos. I 58, 159).I
(Pl. 132, no. I.)

2. Sk. ’30-512; Block C’; sq. 49'88’; stratum VII. Standing female ﬁgure of ﬁne terra-cotta
adorned with incised lines and rosettes. Height 3 in. Much like no. I, but the legs are longer,
there are four rosettes on the chest, and the torque or necklace is modelled in relief. Head
missing. For the rosettes, see my remarks on the red stone statuette of the Chalcolithic Age
from Harappa (M .I .0. vol. I, p. 4.6 and P1. X). The parallel lines around the legs in this and

I The idol shows no mark of attachment at the base, but this would be readily accounted for if it
was set up in a socket-hole or if the tank was made of clay, as in modern Bengal.