
Ww -‘

CH. 24] TERRA-GOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS 471

Mohra Moradu, but there is no doubt that it is a work of the Indo-Afghan School and that its
merits are due to the more than ordinary ability of its author. The image is made of buff-red
clay, well baked as to the head, but indifferently in the body. It originally occupied the small
niche in front of cell 21 in the monastery courtyard. Cf. p. 361 supra; A.S.R. (1915), P1. XXIV, _e
and p. 30. (Pl. 138, ])

Among other terra-cotta heads of the Buddha from Mohra Moradu it may be noted that
one (lVIm. ’15—152) is made of a half-inch thickness of terra—cotta on a core of coarse earth, and
that the whole was ﬁnished with a thin clay wash covered with gold—leaf, some of which still
adheres to it in patches. There was no lime-slip beneath the gold. In another head (Mm.
’15—149), which is completely in the round, each ringlet of hair was made and ﬁxed separately.
The only other head from this site that deserves mention, is the following:

180. Mm. ’15—218; cell 6; 6 ft. below surface. Terra—cotta head of a dew, height 4- 5 in.,
with long wavy hair and dreamy half-closed eyes, as in the dew of the terra—cotta group at
Jauliaﬁ, no. 181 , and of the stucco group at Mohra Moradu, no. 30. As in those cases, the ﬁgure
was at the top of a group and intended to be looking down from above, with the head inclined
forward and seen three-quarter face only. This explains why the top of this head is ﬂattened at
the point where it rested against the sofﬁt of the niche. The surface of the terra—cotta is covered
with a white lime slip. Cf. p. 361 supra. (Pl. 138, k.)

181. In. ’27—F 583. How the various ﬁgures described above—Buddhas, Bodhisattvas,
lay-worshippers, monks and deeds—were grouped together on the walls of the stﬁpas or
monasteries we have already seen well exempliﬁed in the stucco reliefs at both Mohra
Moradu and Jauliaﬁ, but a still more instructive example is provided by a remarkable group
at Jauliaﬁ, which was executed in clay and by a lucky chance converted into terra-cotta
by a ﬁre which burnt down the monastery. This group occupied a large shallow niche
(5 ft. 6 in. x 4 ft. 10-5 in.) in front of cell 29, protected from the weather by the broad veranda
which ran round the four sides of the court. In the «centre stands the Buddha, now headless,
evidently in the abhaya attitude. To his right is a male ﬁgure of medium size wearing a tunic
which reaches to his knees, trousers with buttons for lacing, a clasped and jewelled belt and
a pointed cap. Between this ﬁgure and the Buddha is a small female ﬁgure, clad in a long dress
and ample shawl; and, to the Buddha’s left, a monk wearing a sarighdﬂ, with his right shoulder
bare. Above, to the right and left of the Buddha’s head and shoulders, are two dews, standing
on lotuses and looking down towards the Buddha. On the side walls of the niche were two
large standing Bodhisattvas, but little of them, unfortunately, has survived. Of the ﬁgures on
the back wall of the niche, the monk on the Buddha’s left is probably the abbot of the monastery,
while the man wearing the conical cap and tunic is no doubt the donor of the group, and the
little woman beside him, his wife. The dress and distinctive bearded face of the donor mark him
clearly as a foreigner (mleccha) from the Persian side. Particularly noteworthy are his cap,
laced-up trousers (or possibly leggings over the trousers) and the clasped belt which holds in
his tunic round the hips. The last-mentioned was probably of gold or silver, either embossed
or encrusted with gems. In true oriental fashion, the donor’s wife is represented as little more
than half his size. Her dress, too, is of interest. It consists apparently of a long tunic like the
Greek chitén, with a shawl (Indian sari; Greek himation) draped loosely over the left arm and
shoulder and round the legs in front, leaving the tunic visible over the upper part of the body.
Her ornaments consist of two bangles on each wrist, an armlet on the right arm, a heavy neck-
lace, and a lighter girdle (mekhald) round her hips. Her cap appears to be provided with the
characteristic Persian cheek-pieces or band which passes beneath the chin, and to be secured
with cross straps fastened with a medallion in front and tied at the back of the neck. The dress
worn by the celestial dew to the proper right of the Buddha is much the same as that Worn by
the woman below, except that the under-tunic is so disposed as to leave the right shoulder bare
and that the dew’s long wavy curls are unconﬁned by a cap. A feature of this dew that merits

60-2

Jauliaﬁ
(nos. 181—6)