
t
g
3

CH. 24] TERRA—GOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS 467

the tank. The girls then proceed to make offerings to Yama and his mother by
casting ﬂowers into the tank and pouring water therein, while they recite certain
mantras, bowing down and praying for long life and prosperity for their families
and themselves. When the mantras and prayers are ﬁnished, two tales are told by
the girls about the powers of the Yama-pukur-brata and the evils that come to
those who interfere with the ritual ;I and on the last day of the ceremonies, at the
end of the fourth year, the girls give food to Brahmans, and to a cowboy they give

an umbrella, a piece of cloth, a pair of shoes, a stick and ten cowry shells. Here,

then, in this Yama—pulsar of Bengal we have all the essential features of the votive
tank at Taxila, viz. the square tank of water, the creatures that live in water, the
birds of the air, and the lamps of ﬁre, representing in both cases the four elements
and all created things over which Yama, no less than the Great Mother-goddess,
rules.

A curious analogy to these votive tanks of Taxila is also presented by a class of
earthenware models found in Egyptian graves of the Middle Empire, two examples
of which are illustrated in P1. 136, bb, cc. To Egyptologists they are commonly
known as ‘ soul—houses ’, and the former of the two examples illustrated (no. I 36, bb)
is doubtless a model of an Egyptian house intended for the soul of the departed.2
The other (cc) is more probably in the nature of an ‘ offerings—dish’, but, with its
little lamp in one corner, it can hardly fail to remind us of the tank—shrines of
Taxila, albeit the resemblance may be only a fortuitous one. A closer parallel to
the latter is afforded by some votive models which were found a few years ago at
Hephaestia in the Isle of Lemnos and described in the Illustrated London News3 by
Dr Doro Lévi. These ex-votos (Pl. 136, aa), which date from the sixth century B.C.,
consist of a miniature shrine (usually three-chambered) of terra-cotta, with a shallow
tank in front, the latter being rectangular or semicircular in plan; and in the tank
are various aquatic animals—eels, tortoises and the like—just as there are in the
Taxila tanks. Moreover, in the case of one of the specimens illustrated the resem—
blance is increased by the presence of a ﬁgure seated on the edge of the tank in
front of the shrine. That there is any immediate connexion between these tank-
shrines from Hephaestia and those from Sirkap is, on the face of it, hardly probable,
but it is by no means unlikely that both may go back to a common prototype which
in the Chalcolithic Age may well have had a diffusion in the Near and Middle East
as wide as the cult of the Great Mother-goddess herself. However this may be,
there can be virtually no question that the votive tanks at Taxila were Indian in
character. It is true that they occur very rarely in the Bhir Mound, and that
such as have been found there are of a different type from those found in Sirkap,

I For the brata and the tales told by the girls, see the appendix to this chapter, pp. 473—5.

1 These so-called ‘soul-houses’ were not known, so far as I am aware, in Roman Egypt. A large
number of beautiful specimens were found by Petrie at Rifeh and are published in his Giza]: and Rifeh.
They date from the period between the VIth and XIth Dynasties. In Saite times they are also known,
but of a very rough form.

3 Illustrated London News (28 Feb. 1931), pp. 328—31. Cf. Arch. Anzeiger (I930), p. 14.6; }.H.S.

(I930), p- 245-

Parallels
from Egypt
and Lemnos

Their
character.
essentially
Indian