
Connexion of
ritual tanks
with the
dead

 

466 TERRA-GOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS [CH. 24

absorb into themselves many beliefs and concrete cultural practices undreamt of
by their founders. In the case of Buddhism it is well known how much current
folklore went to the making of the jdtakas, and if we turn to the sculptures of
Bharhut and Siﬁchi—our surest and safest guides to the character of popular
Buddhism in the ﬁrst century B.C.——we ﬁnd evidence on every hand of the extent
to which the Sakya faith had amalgamated with the cults and superstitions of an
earlier age, and become blended with them into the newer Buddhism. Thus we
see in these sculptures how Lakshmi, ancient goddess of prosperity and domestic
happiness, had been transformed into Maya, the mother of the Blessed One; how
the magic Tree of Life and Fortune still continued to shower its blessings on the
Buddhists, as it had showered them from time immemorial on their ancestors; and
how yakshas and yakshis, ndgas and migis played just as real and Vital a part in the
new faith as they had done in the old. It can hardly surprise us, therefore, to-ﬁnd
these little shrines and tanks of the Mother-goddess dedicated by Jaina suppliants
at the foot of their stﬁpas. They are only another illustration of the inevitable fusion
that was taking place between the primitive cults of pre—Aryan India and a creed
which was largely above the heads of the masses. The process is one which can still ‘
be seen going on in Burma, where images of the old indigenous Nats are still being
set up as guardian genii round many of the Buddhist pagodas, as these small
ﬁgures of the Mother-goddess were no doubt meant to protect the Taxila stﬁpas.

It may be, too, that this form of votive offering had some special signiﬁcance in
connexion with the dead; for the stﬁpa, be it remembered, was in origin a burial
tumulus and there is no reason to suppose that its original character was ever lost,
sight of. I make thissuggestion because small tanks of a somewhat similar kind to
those we are discussing are still in use in Bengal in connexion with certain rites
to Yama, the god of Death,” known as Yama-pukur-brata. The rites are performed
by unmarried girls for four consecutive years and for a full month beginning with
the last day of the month Aswin and ending with the last day of Kartik: that is,
from the middle of October to the middle of November. The following is the
manner of the rites. A tiny tank, about a cubit square with a channel on one side, is
dug in the courtyard of the house, and on the eastern side of it are placed plants of
rice, banana, turmeric, tulsi,I main,2 Italmi,3 and susni,4 all tied together in a bundle.
Then a cowry, a betel nut and a piece of turmeric are placed at each of the four
corners of the tank. Next, a number of small ﬁgures are made from the excavated
earth, viz. a crocodile, an eel, a tortoise, a shark, sixteen dolls representing washer-
men, ﬁshermen and others, and a number of crows, cranes, kites and other birds.
Of these, the crocodile, shark, eel and tortoise are placed on the edges of the tank,
the two latter near the channel, the birds stuck on little sticks are planted in the
middle of the tank, and of the sixteen, dolls four are set on each of the banks.
Thereafter, an efﬁgy of Yama is made lying in his mother’s lap, and is placed on the
eastern edge beside the bundle of plants; and lastly, lamps are lit at the corners of

‘ Ocz'mum sanctum. 2 Alocasia Indica.
3 Ipomaea aquatica. 4 Marsilea quadrzfolia.

\