
CH. 24] TERRA=COTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS 465

A few other specimens of these votive tanks have also been recovered from
among the ruins of Sirkap, for the most part in a fragmentary state; but as they
are merely duplicates of the foregoing, it would be superﬂuous to describe them.
The questions that we must now endeavour to answer are, ﬁrst, what was the
signiﬁcance and purpose of these interesting tanks, and secondly” how came they
to be dedicated at these stﬁpas, whether Jaina or Buddhist? One thing, clear before
all else, is that they are intimately connected with the cult of the nude goddess
whose shrine and miniature idol stand, in many of the specimens, on one side of
the tank. Probably this was the Great Mother-goddess whose cult was ubiquitous
in ancient India and went back to immemorial times. It was this same Mother—
goddess, as I have elsewhere shown,I whose terra—cotta images are found at
Mohenjo-daro and other sites of the Chalcolithic Age, who appears ﬁgured on the
thin gold plate found by the late Dr Bloch in the heart of a prehistoric funeral
tumulus at Lauriya Araraj,2 and who is carved in relief on the inner side of certain
ringstones of Maurya date—themselves possessed of magic properties associated
with fertility.3 Then, another obvious feature of these tanks is that they are

symbolical of the four elements and of all creation: of earth, air, ﬁre and water,

and of all the beings that live in them—the earth symbolised by the clay of which
the tank is made, the air by the birds, the ﬁre by the lamps, and the water by the
aquatic creatures within, as well as by the water itself with which the tank was
partly, ﬁlled. Such symbolism calls for no recondite explanation, for there is no
reason for supposing that it implies anything more than that, in the eyes of the
votary, the goddess was supreme over the four elements and all created things
contained in them. That, at any rate, is an adequate explanation, beyond which it
is hardly necessary to go. We should not forget, however, that tanks have a certain
peculiar sanctity of their own in India, partly because they are the familiar adjuncts
of countless shrines and temples throughout the length and breadth of the land,
partly because of the all-important part they play in the ceremonial ablutions of
the worshippers. An ex-voto, therefore, consisting of a miniature shrine with a
tank by its side would be a very natural and appropriate form of offering.

But why—and this is the second question we have to answer—should these
ritual tanks which appertained to an essentially Hindu cult, have been dedicated
at Jaina or—'—if there is any doubt about them being Jaina—at Buddhist stﬁpas?
The answer is to be found in the contamination which has taken place in every
religion known to us, and which in the ﬁrst century A.D. was affecting Jainism
as much as it was affecting Buddhism. However philosophic and abstract in their
essence these two religious systems may originally have been, it was inevitable that
they should take much of their subsequent colour from the primitive and long-
established faiths of the people, and that, as they cast their nets wider and wider
among the many nations of India and its varied classes of society, they should

I See M.I.C. vol. I, pp. 49—52.
2 Cf. A.S.R. (1906—7), p. 124..
3 See ‘Stone Objects’, ch. 25, nos. 129—32 infra.

 

Connexion
with cult of

Mother-
goddess

Symbolism
of the four
elements

Sanctity of
tanks in India

Fusion of
older cuts
with
Buddhism
and Jainism