
Figures and
other objects
of terra-cotta

Terra—cottas

from Bhir
Mound

Te‘rra—cottas
from Sirkap

 

44.0 TERRA—GOTTA AND CLAY OBJECTS [CPL 24

likely to occur, and so far from expecting to ﬁnd other examples of such ﬁgures,
one can only marvel at the extraordinary luck of ﬁnding any at all.

With the exception of these Buddhist groups, which are partly of sunudriecl clay
and partly of terracotta, all the objects described below are of terra—cotta. Most of
them come from the Bhir Mound and Sirkap cities, but it is a curious fact that
none were found in the lowest (fourth) stratum of the Blur/Mound, and of the very
few from the third stratum some are undoubtedly strays from the second, and the
rest cannot be dated much earlier than the close of the fourth century B.C. This can
hardly be other than a coincidence, since terra~cotta ﬁgurines and toys are frequent
even in the prehistoric sites of the Indus, and they must have been fabricated at all
periods when household pottery was in use. As will be seen from the stratigraphical
chart below, the collection from the Bhir Mound comprises ﬁgurines of a primitive
idol type as well as a few of a mundane character, votive reliefs representing
various male and female deities, potuheilied dwarfs (kumbhdzzda) animal and other
toys, playing—dice, personal ornaments, including heads, a few specimens of ritual
tanks, and an dycigapaga plaque of substantially later date than the rest. Among all
these pieces the only one of Hellenistic design is the medallion or bulla no. 137,
with the relief of a lion killing a bull. No. 135 may be an Indian transcript of
a Greek original, such as no. 136. Nosao and 27 may also show some Western
inﬂuence, and nos. :8 and r9 Egyptian inﬂuence. But, with these few exceptions,
all the terra~cottas from the Bhir Mound are characteristically Indian and clearly
indicate the direction from which the arts and crafts of Taxila drew their inspira-
tion under the rule of the Mauryas.

The primitive—looking little idols nos. 1—5 probably represent a type of Nude
Mother or Earth goddess which had been handed down from immemorial anti-
quity. Four of these idols come from the Bhir Mound—no. I from stratum III,
nos. 3, 4 and 5 from stratum II. No. 2 comes from the lowest (pre-Greek)
settlement on Sirkap, which may be as old or older than anything on the Bhir

Mound. But we must beware of attributing a high antiquity to all these small'

idols. Some of them—particularly nos. I, 2 and 3—may be, and probably are,
relics of a remote past, which, like the neolithic celts described in chapter 25,
nos. 1—5, were still regarded as objects of veneration or curiosity in the fourth and
third centuries B.C. On the other hand, we know that idols of the same type and
much the same primitive appearance were still being fashioned in the ﬁrst
century A.D. for use in ritual tanks (e.g. nos. 158 and 159 infrazPl. 136, w, x),
and it may be, therefore, that none of these specimens was older than the stratum
in which it was found.

When we turn from the Bhir Mound to the Sirkap terra~cottas, we note some
conspicuous differences between them. After the Bactrian Greek conquest (which

marks the dividing line between the two sites) the inﬂuence of Maurya India fades

out and is replaced by Hellenistic inﬂuence from the West. The characteristic
eX-voto reliefs of the Maurya period now cease to be manufactured. A few rare
specimens (nos. 15, 25, 36) occur here and there in Sirkap, in levels as late as the