
620 GOLD AND SILVER JEWELLERY [CH. 30

more than ordinarily rich in it. There are many ancient gold workings also in
Hyderabad State, the Madras Presidency, and the Mysore, where the Kolar
district to-day yields over 90% of India’s total production (about J£2,000,000
annually). In ancient times there may also have been a substantial supply from
Dardistan and Tibet, which are said to have yielded the well-known ‘ant-gold’
(Sk. pzpilika) of classical writers.I In Afghanistan, gold also occurs in the neigh—
bourhood of Kandahar and on the north side of the Hindu Kush, while a certain
amount is said to be washed from the streams draining the Kﬁh—i—Baba in Kohistan
and above Laghman and Kunar. Although, however, there were many possible
sources of supply in India and Afghanistan, the yield is hardly likely, even before
the introduction of a gold currency by the Kushans, to have been an adequate one,
since a prodigious amount of the precious metal went into jewellery. On the eastern
side of India the supply was probably supplemented by’ imports from Assam,
Burma and Malay (Aurea Chersonesus), where gold mines of ancient date have
been discovered in the State of Pahang (Schoff, Periplus, p. 259, para. 63). In the
North—West, especially after the establishment of the Kushan Empire, the supply
was supplemented by imports from the Near East by way of the Persian Gulf,
through which the Kushans must normally have conducted their trade with the
West (Warmington, op. cit. p. 299).2 In conﬁrmation of this it may be noticed that
an ingot of gold found in the Saka-Parthian city of Sirkap (no. 214 infra), although
without a stamp, bears a signiﬁcant resemblance to the ingots which were traded
in the Roman world.3 The old idea that India was a land of gold, which many
writers still persist in repeating, was perhaps due to the fact that so much wealth
was sunk in gold jewellery, but it is certainly wide of the mark.4

Some general remarks on the jewellery from the Bhir Mound will be found in
vol. I at pp. 101, 104, 106 and I 1 I, and on the jewellery from Sirkap at pp. 134, 203.
Other references are given in the individual entries of the catalogue below.

CLASS I. Ear-pendants and ear—rings (nos. 1—53)

Most of the specimens found at Taxila are of Greek or Graeco-Roman design.

The chief types are as follows:

(a) Amphom type. Ear-pendants (évo'o'na) of this type were in vogue in the
Graeco—Roman world from the third century B.C. onwards, but became particularly
fashionable in the ﬁrst century A.D. From the places of their provenance it has been

1 Cf. p. 14, n. 1 supra.

2 Cf. Schoff, Periplus, pp. 258, 259. Strabo, quoting Gorgos the mining engineer, says that mines
of gold and silver existed not far from the Salt Range in the Panjab (presumably in the Himalayas) but
that the Indians were unacquainted with mining and the smelting of ores. That may well have been
the case in the Panjab, but it is no proof that mining was not practised in the south of India, of which
nothing was then known.

3 Cf. B.M. Cat. of jewellery, Pl. LXXII; Dar. et Sag. s.v. ‘Metalla’, p. 1865.

4 Cf. C.H.I. I, pp. 343 and 403, where the supposed abundance of gold in India is said to have
militated against the circulation of the Persian daric in those regions, the ratio of gold to silver being
1213-3 in Persia and 1:8 in India. Assuming that the latter ratio is correct, its explanation may lie
rather in the exceptional dearness of silver than in the cheapness of gold.