
718 STONE SCULPTURES [CH. 36

with clasped hands, the other two seated in meditation on low grass-strewn seats. Traces of a
now lost ﬁgure on the upper left, between the aged monk and the tree. Of phyllite. Height
82 in. Kn. ’32—302; front of B15; I ft. 9 in. below surface. Cf. p. 340 supra. (Pl. 220, no. 119.)

120. Fragment showing a high gateway and part of the contiguous crenellated and loopholed
city wall. Emerging from under the ﬂat lintel of the gateway, a ﬁgure appears with hands now
lost but seemingly carrying a round object (? alms—bowl). Despite the absence of the Buddha,
due to the mutilation of the right side of the fragment, and the presence of a second person with
an alms—bowl—unless this latter be a second representation of the emerging ﬁgure—there can
be little doubt that the latter is Nanda, enveigled by the Buddha into carrying his alms-bowl
from the city of Kapilavastu to the Nyagrodharama. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 234. Of mica schist.
Height 19 in. Dh. ’13—170; D3; I ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra.

121. Relief depicting the Buddha attended by Vajrapani and surrounded by women. The
Buddha, haloed and moustached, is seated on a cushioned throne with turned legs. Over the
cushion is a coverlet, with three lines of beaded ornament, which falls in front of the throne to
the level of a small footstool. The Buddha’s right hand is raised in abhaya-mudrd, his left rests
in his lap, the ﬁrst two ﬁngers pointing downwards. On the Buddha’s left are four standing
females, two younger ones in the upper background, two elder ones in the foreground. By the
Buddha’s right shoulder stands a fully clothed and bearded Vajrapani, the end of his heavy
wjra in his right hand. Below him is a middle—aged woman with two little girls, the taller
standing by the edge of the throne, the smaller in front of it, her head level with the cushion.
The skilful characterisation of the varying ages of the women is exceptional, and their coiffures
exhibit great variety. The two younger women wear Chaplets, but in the case of the older
women these are replaced by light coverings, falling like veils behind the shoulders. All the
women wear ear—rings, collars, necklaces, bracelets and, where the feet are shown, anklets,
except the very aged female on the right who wears only bracelets. The attitudes of the women
are varied; three carry offerings in baskets, another has a bunch of blossoms in her right hand
and one young female and the two children clasp their hands in adoration. There are no details
to assist in the identiﬁcation of this scene and we can only recognise some of the many bene-
factresses of the Buddha or so many donors. Of phyllite. Height 19 in. Cf. p. 251 supra;
A.S.R. (1912). P1. VIII, d and Marshall, Guide to Taxila, Pl. VIII, a. Dh. ’I2—2,286; D3;
5 ft. 6 in. below surface. (Pl. 221, no. 121.)

122. Fragment from left side of a relief showing part of a haloed dew or Bodhisattva with
hands clasped in adoration and facing right. When complete the ﬁgure was, like the dew on the
upper left corner of no. 129 infra, seated with legs crossed at the ankles but all below the ankles
is now lost. Cf. also no. 123 infra. The hair, dressed high on the head, is bound by a jewelled
band above the brow and falls behind in a bunch of curls. An armlet and ﬂat collar adorn the
ﬁgure and the edge of the halo is embellished by a beading and incised line. Of phyllite. Height
3-62 in. Cf. p. 249 supra; A.S.R. (1914), P1. X, 8. .Dh. ’14—721; B 18; 2 ft. below surface.

123. Fragment from right of a relief such as no. 129 infra, showing a haloed dew or Bodhi—
sattva seated in easy attitude on a throne, with legs crossed at the ankles. The face, damaged,
was turned half—left. The hair is dressed high on the head, and ear-rings and bracelets adorn the
ﬁgure. The left hand grasps the edge of the robe in the lap, the right holds the very thick stalk
of a large conventionalised ﬂower, probably intended for a lotus. This ﬁgure, like no. 122 supra
and no. 129 infra, is probably from some large and elaborate composition of the ‘Miracle of
Sravasti’. Of phyllite. Height 5 in. Cf. p. 249 supra; A.S.R. (1914), P1. XVIII. Dh. ’I4——752;
B—19; 2 ft. 6 in. below surface.

124. An elaborate but mutilated representation of the ‘Visit of Indra’. Cf. no. 113 supra
and A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 246. In a cave in a rocky mountain the haloed Buddha, face missing, is
seated in meditation. From surrounding caves the heads of wild animals peep out, and there
are traces of two headless beasts along with other undeﬁnable creatures. Trees and foliage
spring from the mountain sides, and here and there on rocky ledges are human ﬁgures,