
CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 719

mostly standing, with faces towards the Buddha; the greater number are defaced, though
four haloed, adoring devas are still fairly well preserved, in pairs on either side, near the top
of the cave. On the right is Paﬁcika, seated in European fashion, wearing a coat of mail,
the lower end of his long spear still preserved between his legs, as in A.G—B.G. ﬁg. 432, and in
the inscribed representation in the Peshawar Museum. Below Paﬁcika are traces of ﬁve
standing ﬁgures; those corresponding to them on the left of the cave are now only faintly
discernible, but, judging from replicas of this scene, the one nearest the cave may have been
Indra’s musician, Paﬁcasikha. Behind him are the six hoods of a Naga Snake—king, and a
little higher up is a small ﬁgure, seated in meditation. The long panel below, on which Indra
and his entourage are shown, is so defaced that among the twelve ﬁgures crowding the scene,
it is now impossible to identify any; on the right, however, are clear indications of Indra’s
elephant, Airavata, and the royal umbrella. Indra, himself, is lost in the medley of gods forming
his cortege. Neither is it possible to name the ﬁgure on the left, seemingly rising a mi corps
from the bottom edge of the panel. Of phyllite. Height 32-5 in. Cf. p. 384. supra;jn. Mem.
P1. XVIII, a. In. ’16—130; C15; 6 ft. 6 in. below surface. (Pl. 221, no. 124.)

125. Fragment from left of a relief of the ‘ Offering by the Monkey’. A monkey, erect on its
hind legs, advances to right holding in its two paws the alms-bowl of madhu to present to the
now lost Buddha, who was seated under a pipal tree, of which part of the foliage is preserved.
Behind the monkey is a seated meditating monk, and between him and the animal is a headless
standing ﬁgure,I while near the pipal foliage are the head and torso of a man of good caste, with
elaborate turban, facing right. On the upper left edge is the foliage of a tree, doubtless the one
from which the monkey has collected the madhu. Of phyllite. Height 9-25 in. Cf. A.S.R.

(1914), P1. X111, a. Dh. ’14—890; between P 10 and P7, on top of wall. (Pl. 221, no. 125.)
126. Headless image of the Buddha, seated in dharmacakra—mudrd on a full-blown lotus.

The robe conceals the entire body except the right arm and shoulder and the soles of the feet,
which are turned upwards, parallel to the front of the body. On the breast is placed the right
hand, palm inwards, the ﬁrst two ﬁngers extended, the others slightly bent; the left hand is
beneath the right, thumb and foreﬁnger pressed together, touching the lower edge of the little
ﬁnger of the right hand. Cf. no. 128 infra. Of phyllite. Height 9-18 in. Dh. ’16—237; mon.

court A; 2 ft. 6 in. below surface. Cf. p. 278 supra. (Pl. 221, no. 126.)
127. Fragment of image of the Buddha, seated on a full—blown lotus, in meditation. The

head and greater part of the chest are missing, only the arms and crossed legs being fully
preserved. The hands are not, as usual, lying in the lap with their palms upwards, but are
clasped in front with the palms towards the body. Of phyllite. Height 6-25 in. Dh. ’15—982;

court A; 8 ft. below surface. Cf. p. 278 supra.
128. Headless image of the Buddha shown seated in dharmacakra-mudrd, with the bare soles

of the feet upturned, as in no. 126 supra. The robe exposes the right arm and‘shoulder. The
seat, which is damaged, was in all probability a lotus throne, as in nos. 126 and 127 supra, but
with a modiﬁed base. Below the Buddha’s right knee and attached to the throne stands a
defaced, haloed ﬁgure, seemingly a Bodhisattva. Despite the damage to the hands, it is plain
that their position was not precisely that shown so clearly on no. 126 supra. Of phyllite.
Height 17 in. Dh. ’13—231; N4; 3 ft. 9 in. below surface. Cf. pp. 262—3 supra.

129. Fragment from the right of a relief of the ‘Miracle of Srivasti’, showing haloed
Bodhisattvas in various attitudes, seated or standing on lotus ﬂowers upheld by their stems.

One is seated in easy attitude, legs crossed at the ankles (cf. no. 123 supra), hands clasped in
adoration; two hold long garlands in front of the body; another holds a ﬂask in the left hand,

suggestive of Maitreya, whilst another, seated on his haunches, knees up, one foot on the
seed-vessel on which he sits, the other on the stamens of the lotus, draws a garland or jewels
from a bowl held in the left hand. Reliefs of this nature are the source of such sculpture as

I The headless ﬁgure and the madhu tree appear on some fragments belonging to this relief which are
missing from the photograph in P1. 221, no. 125.

91~2