
722 STONE SCULPTURES [CH. 36

salutation, the other with hands clasped in adoration. In the upper background, to right, is
another ﬁgure with his back turned to the spectator and right arm raised. On the Buddha’s
right stands a bearded Brahman with right hand extended as in salutation, a water-pot
(kamauglalu) in his left hand. His right shoulder is bare and his robe consists of a black-buck
skin with the horns still attached and pointing upward. The general composition is suggestive
of the Adhyeshaua, but neither the Brahman (P representing Brahma) nor the personage of
high rank (P representing Indra) are making the traditional gestures of entreaty, and moreover
the usual place of Brahma in this episode is on the Buddha’s left. Of phyllite. Height
95 in. Dh. ’12—583; 12; 3 ft. 8 in. below surface. Cf. p. 255 supra. (Pl. 224, no. 14.1.)

142. Image of the Bodhisattva Maitreya standing on a pedestal, the front of which is
supported at the corners by Corinthian pilasters and embellished by four ﬁve-petalled eglantines.
The ﬁgure wears two garments, one tied at the waist and falling in graceful folds to the ankles.
The cord of this robe is clearly indicated beneath the upper garment. The latter, of lighter
texture, is draped from the left shoulder so that it covers all the right side except the arm,
shoulder and upper chest. The two ends are brought to the left shoulder, the front one con-
cealing the left upper arm and hanging behind in stiff folds; the other end is brought from the
back over the left shoulder, under the armpit and pulled across the back to the right side and
then brought to the front over the right and left forearms to hang below the waist in a pleasing
loop. The hair is tied above in a loop, as in the Apollo Belvedere; below, it is bound by strings
of beads with a cylindrical clasp in front. Save for a moustache, the face is clean-shaven. The
large, heavy ear-rings have a lion’s head ornament at the pierced lobe.

The other jewels comprise a ﬂat jewelled collar, a ﬂexible shoulder chain, bejewelled at
intervals, a similar necklace hanging to the right of the chest and a breast—chain passing over
the left shoulder and under the right arm, to which two cylindrical amulet-holders are attached.
In front of the body and over these, outside the upper garment, a necklace of thick, ﬂexible
chainwork terminates in an ornament on which two winged females, facing, hold between
them, by cords, a cylindrical gem. On each arm is a trefoil armlet with straight base, the one
on the left arm indicated under the tightly drawn drapery.

The left hand is lost with the water-pot (kamaudalu) it once held. From the mortice in the
right forearm it is clear that the missing portion was originally a separate piece, a device
economical of labour and material. The ﬁgure wears sandals with jewelled lacings. The urud is
represented as a small circular projection. Of the halo only traces remain. Of phyllite. Height
40 in. Mm. ’15—121; from cell no. 8. Cf. p. 362, no. 9 supra; A.S.R. (1915), P1. XXIV, a
and Marshall, Guide to Taxila, P1. XXIV. (Pl. 223, no. 142.)

143. Image of the Bodhisattva Maitreya, haloed and standing on a defaced pedestal. The
ﬁgure is moustached, the curled hair, dressed high above, falling wig-like on either side, as in
Brahma ﬁgures (cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 212). The two garments resemble those in no. 14.2 supra,
but the upper is brought twice to the right side, not held by the two arms, and both ends ﬁnish
on the left side, one in a heavy tassel by the left hand. No urua is indicated. The right hand was
in abhaya-mudrd, the left holds a ﬂask (kamaudalu) close to his side. The ornaments comprise
a collar of unusual design, a necklace of ﬂexible chain work with ornate terminals, armlets,
bracelets and heavy beaded ear-rings. Of phyllite. Height 34 in. Mm. ’15—1 18; cell no. 8.

Cf. p. 362, no. IO supra; A.S.R. (1915), P1. XXIV, d. (Pl. 224, no. 143.)
144. Image of the Bodhisattva Maitreya in two pieces, standing on the ﬂat seed-vessel of

a full-blown lotus. Head lost. Wears a dhoti gathered in a thick roll round the hips; a narrow
shawl, wound round the left shoulder, is brought to and round the right hip to fall in a graceful
loop in front of the thighs. Feet are bare. Wears a jewelled collar, thick necklace and armlet,
indicated under drapery of left upper arm. The right arm and left hand are missing, but the
kamaua’alu, held in the latter, is still preserved. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 418—20. Of phyllite.
Height 14~Io in. Kn. ’31—388/577; front of A15; 3 ft. 5 in. below surface. Cf. p. 330 supra.

(Pl. 224, no. 144.)