
716 STONE SCULPTURES [CH. 36

in abhaya-mudrd on a grass-strewn throne. Two of the Lokapalas stand on either side, each
holding an alms-bowl. Under each of the half-arches a worshipper kneels on one knee,
facing inwards With hands elapsed in adoration. Between this scene and the lowest panel is an
acanthus frieze above a ﬂat bead-and-reel moulding.

(c) In the bottom panel is shown the ‘Entreaty to Preach’, Adhyeshaua. In the centre, the
haloed Buddha, face now lost, is seated in abhaya-mudrd under a tree on a grass-strewn throne,
the front of which is ornamented by a diamond pattern with a boss in the centre of each diamond.
On the right of the Buddha is a haloed deity, presumably Indra, though the head—dress is not
so characteristic as it usually is; the corresponding position on the other side of the Buddha
shows two headless ﬁgures intended for Brahma and an attendant. Indra, Brahma and the
attendant have the hands clasped in entreaty. A defaced Vajrapani is between the Buddha and
Indra and in each upper corner of the panel is a haloed deity. On the top and sides of the panel
is a ﬂat foliate moulding. Of phyllite. Height 18 in. Cf. p. 362, no. 8 supra; A.S.R. (1915),
P1. XXIV, c. Mm. ’15—111; cell 8. (Pl. 219, no. 110.)

111. Fragment from right side of a relief depicting the ‘Offering of the four bowls’. Cf.
no. 110, 1) supra. In the foreground, two of the Lokapalas, without haloes, face left towards
the now lost Buddha, holding large alms-bowls in their hands. There are traces of at least two
ﬁgures, one, with hands clasped on the breast, in the background. The feet of the Lokapalas
and the faces of all the ﬁgures are now lost. Of phyllite. Height 17-75 in. Dh. ’12—C 61.

I 12. Fragment of damaged frieze showing the cult of the Buddha’s alms-bowl. In the centre,
the alms—bowl of the Buddha set on a cushion in the seat of a draped throne. The throne is
provided with high sides, over which is stretched a canopy, as in A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 21 1. Its front
is also draped, and its legs rest on lions couchaut regardcmt. On either side are three worshippers,
the one nearest the throne on bended knee, with hands touching the ends of the canopy. Such
scenes are frequently found on the pedestals of images. Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 211 and 459, a.
Of phyllite. Length 185 in. Dh. ’30—780; mon. court A; sq. 17-18’; 4 ft. 8 in. below surface.
Cf. p. 278 supra.

113. Relief of unusual character depicting the ‘Visit of Indra’. Cf. no. 124 infra and
A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 246. The panel is divided horizontally into two compartments by a balustrade
in the form of a railing. In the lower the Buddha is seen, seated in meditation in a cave, his
hands hidden in his robe. Outside the cave, on his left, stands Indra with halo and his usual
high head-dress (cf. nos. 147—50 infra). His clasped hands touch the cave-wall. A unique
feature is the presence, on the other side of the cave, of Brahma, haloed and in a similar
attitude of adoration. Instead of the teeming life of the jungle the only animals are two wild
boars in front of and below the mouth of the cave. Above the balustrade are four ﬁgures; the
two on the sides are diving headlong, like Wingless angels, towards the middle of the balustrade,
where from their cupped hands they rain down large, four-petalled blossoms which fall in
front of the balustrade and on the top of the cave. In the background and between these
two spirited and unique ﬁgures are two haloed devas about to drop similar ﬂowers over the
balustrade. Apropos of these Wingless angels, M. Foucher notes that they have their nearest
counterpart in the Portail Royal of Chartres Cathedral (A.D. 1145—50). Of phyllite. Height
21-25 in. Cf. p. 346 supra; A.S.R. (1927), P1. XIX, 1. Gr. ’27—109; court D, room 2; 9 ft.
below surface. (P1. 219, no. 113.)

114. Relief showing the haloed Buddha in meditation, his hands hidden in his robe, seated
under a tree on a grass-strewn throne. On either side, a standing ﬁgure offers to the Buddha
a circular object, apparently a bowl of food. The personage on the Buddha’s left is almost
obliterated save for the offering and edge of robe and the legs; but the one on the right is well
preserved. He wears a dhotz', one end of which is drawn up across his bare chest to his left
shoulder, wound tightly round the neck and then drawn cowl—like over his head, hiding all but
his ears and a tuft of hair above his forehead. Cf. no. I I 5 infra and A.G—B.G. ﬁgs. 250 and 3 3‘3.
This concealment of the head generally indicates inferior caste. Despite the absence of the