
a; .-,4w..am~_~w.. W...

imam... 4.13m WMMkmmAMme... «-mmwm-

 

CH. 36] STONE SCULPTURES 717

traditional ox-carts (cf. Peshawar Museum no. 799), it is probable that this scene is intended
to depict the food offering of the two merchants, Trapussa and Bhallika. Cf. no. I I6 infra. Of
phyllite. Dharmarajika Stﬁpa. The sculpture is still in situ, at the side of the steps near N 18
which lead to the monastery area. (Pl. 220, no. 114.)

115. Fragment from a relief such as no. 114 supra, consisting of the head of a ﬁgure with
head shaven save for a tuft of hair above the centre of the forehead. The head, except the face
and tuft of hair, is covered in the folds of a shawl. The ﬁgure is probably that of a man of
inferior caste. Cf. no. 114 supra. Of phyllite. Height 2-4 in. Dh. ’21-B 64; D3; 2 ft. below
surface. Cf. p. 251 supra. (Pl. 226, no. 115.)

116. Relief showing the haloed Buddha seated in meditation under a tree, now defaced,
on a grass—strewn throne with saw-tooth moulding on upper edge. Standing on either side of
the Buddha are two men of middle caste. In each case the one nearer the Buddha bears an
offering in his cupped hands; those behind are clasping their hands in adoration. In the upper
right corner are traces of another adoring ﬁgure. All the faces are lost save those of the two
ﬁgures on the left of the Buddha. The nearer is bearded, his companion clean-shaven. The
scene probably represents the ‘ Offering of Food’ by the two merchants, Trapussa and Bhallika,
despite the absence of the traditional ox-carts. Cf. no. 114 supra. If this identiﬁcation be
correct, then the defaced tree is the rdjayataua tree, under which the Buddha was then medi-
tating. Of phyllite. Length 16.75 in. Dh. ’12—1,o36; D; 8 ft. below surface. Cf. p. 251 supra.

117. Relief depicting the haloed Buddha seated in abhaya-mua'ra' on a grass—strewn throne
with saw-tooth moulding on the upper edge. To his left stands a small defaced ﬁgure in an
attitude of adoration, and behind it, the upper part of a haloed ﬁgure with a high head-dress
and hands clasped on the breast. On the Buddha’s right is a venerable bearded Brahman
with clasped hands and face turned to the Buddha; and, in the background, an aged Vajrapani,
with his vajra in his left hand. Despite some unusual features, the scene may possibly repre-
sent the Adhyeshaua, the ‘Entreaty of the Buddha’ by the gods Brahma and Indra to preach his
doctrine; for the haloed ﬁgure appears to be Indra and the aged Brahman, though lacking
a halo, might well represent Brahma. Cf. A.G—B.G. ﬁgs. 212—13, 215, 347, a and 440.
Of phyllite. Height 8-6 in. Kn. ’3 1—130; octagonal chamber, A I; 2 ft. below surface.
Cf. pp. 328—9 supra. (Pl. 220, no. 117.)

1 18. Part of a unique representation of the First Sermon showing the haloed Buddha seated
on a grass-strewn throne, his left hand grasping the hem of his robe (in quite unusual fashion),
his right hand touching the Wheel of the Law. The wheel is thirteen-spoked with small
bosses on the inside of the rim between the spokes, and small umbrellas (P) corresponding to
them on the outside (p. 34, n. I supra). The wheel rests on the three points of a triratna,
supported by a dwarf Indo-Corinthian pillar. Flanking the throne are two deer couchant
regardant. An unusual feature is the presence, on the left of the Buddha, of Indra, haloed
but now defaced, while Brahma, likewise haloed and in the guise of a Brahman novice,
occupies the corresponding position on the Buddha’s right. On Brahma’s right is a bearded
Vajrapani, with ﬂy—whisk (caurz') in right hand and vajra in left. In the left foreground two
monks are seated on low, circular, grass-strewn seats. The right of the panel is lost, and of the
other three monks only traces of one and his seat remain. A spirited, haloed, ﬂying dew with
ﬂower(?) offering in left hand ﬁlls the upper, left corner. Along the lower edge is a stylised,
foliate moulding. Of phyllite. Height 19 in. Cf. p. 251 supra; A.S.R. (1912), P1. VIII, e and
Marshall, Guide to Taxila, Pl. VIII, b. Dh. ’13—69; D 3; 5 ft. 6in. below surface. (Pl. 220, no. 1 18.)

119. Fragment of relief depicting the ‘First Sermon’. Cf. no. 118 supra. All of the panel
to the left of the Buddha is lost save the standing ﬁgure of a youthful Vajrapani. The Buddha is
seated under a tree on a throne, no longer grass-strewn, but with the saw—tooth moulding on
the upper edge. His left hand grasps his robe, his extended right hand (now lost) touching one
of three interlaced, ﬁve-spoked wheels, each of which is supported on a point of a triratna.
Cf. A.G-B.G. ﬁg. 219. On the Buddha’s right are three monks of various ages, one standing,

MT 9I