
712 STONE SCULPTURES [CH. 36

90, a. On the extreme left are traces of the leaf hut (parnasdla) in which appear the heads of
Syama’s blind parents, to Whom the king brings tidings of their son’s death. The king raises
his right hand in the chin-mudrd (cf. no. 6 supra and P1. 212, no. 6). He is then seen leading to
their son’s body the aged couple, whose blind helplessness is very cleverly depicted. From the
right, a haloed deity (Indra) comes ﬂying through the air; in his raised right hand is a ﬂask of
ambrosia which, with a baptismal gesture, he is pouring on Syama’s head, and the boy is shown
with uplifted hands already half-restored to life. Behind Indra stands the king, watching the
resurrection. For a representation of the Syama fataka on the west gateway at Saﬁchi, cf.
Marshall and Foucher, Monuments 0f Saﬁcln', vol. II, Pl. LXV, a and p. 225. Total length
2 ft. 11 in. Cf. p. 251 supra; A.S.R. (1912), P1. IX, a. Dh. ’12—479, 1,811; between L and D3;
3—5 ft. below surface. (Pl. 217, no. 90, a, b.)

91. Panel of phyllite showing a haloed Bodhisattva seated in meditation on an expanded
lotus. Though the head is adorned with the usual elaborate turban and heavy ear—rings are
worn, the body is clothed to the neck like 3. Buddha ﬁgure. A defaced ﬁgure, on the right of the
Bodhisattva, is seated in European fashion, the face turned towards the Bodhisattva and the
hands clasped in adoration. There are slight traces of a ﬁgure to the right. This probably depicts
the Bodhisattva in the Tushita Heaven at the moment when he makes the examination of the
time, continent, country and family wherein he is to be born again for the last time. Cf.
A.G-B.G. ﬁgs. 145, 349. Height 7-5 in. Dh. ’15—1,093; south of N 5; 2 ft. below surface.

92. Relief depicting Queen Maya’s dream. On the extreme right and left is an ogee arch
supported by Indo-Persepolitan pillars, the capitals of addorsed bulls. A curious feature is
that, although the bases are shown, the circular shafts are absent and evidently never existed,
as one base does not lie vertically below its capital. Between the two arches, its ﬂoor level with
their capitals, runs a balcony, above the balustrade of which are seen the busts of two ﬁgures
to the right, one of them defaced. Below the gallery, on a draped couch, its legs carved in the
semblance of a horned animal aﬁronté, lies the sleeping Maya, lying on her left side, her head
on a pillow, her left hand under her head and her right resting on the near edge of the couch.
Above her right side and in front of the balcony are traces of the circular disk on which was the
Elephant of the Conception, but this and the left side of the balcony are now broken away.
Under the balcony and at Maya’s head stands a female attendant; at her feet is a defaced
guardswoman, armed with a spear. Under the arch to the right and with her back to the
spectator another attendant stands holding a water—pot in her right hand, her upraised left
hand resting on the bell capital of the pillar. In the corresponding arch to the left stands an
attendant, facing, with legs crossed at the ankles; all above the waist is defaced. A small
footstool is in front of the couch. The general arrangement of this scene closely resembles that
of a sculpture from Jamrud (Lahore Museum, no. 567) which depicts the Sleeping Women.
Cf. J. Burgess, Anc. Monuments of India, Pl. 127, and 3.1.24.1. (1898), P1. XII, 1. Of phyllite,
of a paler variety than usual. Length 15-6 in. Cf. A.S.R. (1930—4), Pl. XCIV, e. Kn. ’3 1—128;
octagonal chamber, A1; 2 ft. below surface. Cf. pp. 328—9 supra. (Pl. 218, no. 92.)

93. Relief of phyllite depicting the Samcodana or ‘Instigation of the Bodhisattva’, by the
gods, to leave the world. On a draped throne, in front of which is a footstool, sits the haloed
Bodhisattva with his right hand upraised in the abhaya-mudrd; the left hand in the lap holds
a ﬂask. His robe is that of a Buddha. No jewels are worn and the hair is dressed above in
a small double loop. Over the throne is a baldachin covered by a canopy with garland-like
fringe and supported by columns of unusual form. These, for about two-thirds of their height,
are of slender, tapering Indo-Corinthian type with acanthus capitals, their bases showing a lion
aﬂronte’. Above the acanthus capitals the columns are continued as thinner, tapering, circular
shafts up to the canopy. On each capital and with one arm round the thin shaft is a little naked
yaksha, leaning inwards; the one to the left holds up a defaced object in his right hand. On either
side of the Bodhisattva a haloed deity is seated in European fashion with face turned towards
him. Indra, to the left of the Bodhisattva, raises up his right hand as if in argument; Brahma,