
Chapter 27. IRON OBJECTS

(INCLUDING STEEL)‘

HE OBJECTS of iron described below represent only a small fraction of

those brought to light at TaXila; for the vast majority were in so frag-

mentary and corroded a state that even their form was unrecognisable;

and in many cases nothing remained but a rusty discoloration of the
surrounding soil to ShOW that they had ever existed. Of the 221 objects included
in the list more than four-ﬁfths came from the Saka—Parthian strata of Sirkap and
the early medieval monasteries at Iauliaﬁ, Mohra Moradu, etc., and less than one—
ﬁfth from the Bhir Mound and the early settlements in Sirkap. This disparity,
however, must not be taken to imply that iron at TaXila was less common in the
centuries before than in the centuries after Christ. It is simply becauseiron, which
is peculiarly liable to corrosion and disintegration, has the best chance of survival
when subjected, to great heat (Without of course being melted) and then buried in
wood ash, and that these conditions were fulﬁlled only in the case of the objects
found in some of the Saka-Parthian buildings of Sirkap and the later monasteries of
Mohra Moradu, Jauliaﬁ, etc., of which the former were burnt out by the invading
Kushans and the latter by the White Huns. In the lower settlements of Sirkap
and in the Bhir Mound no such general conﬂagrations appear to have occurred,
though individual houses were burnt down, and the number of iron objects that
escaped disintegration was accordingly very small.

As will be seen from the subjoined stratigraphical chart, the objects that have
survived fall into ﬁve groups, viz.: (A) Household utensils, (B) Arms and armour,
(C) Horse-bridles and elephant—goads, (D) Carpenter’s and blacksmith’s tools,
and (E) Agricultural implements. Besides these, there is also a small group (F)
of miscellaneous articles such as needles and plummets, and a number of un—
wrought ingOts. Some of these objects are clearly of foreign origin, by which I
mean that they are copied from non—Indian prototypes. Thus, in Group A, the
ladles with vertical handles (nos. 24, 25), candelabra (nos. 33—5), wheeled braziers
(n03. 37, 38) and folding chair (no. 54) were all familiar types in the Graeco-Roman
world of the ﬁrst century A.D., but not previously known in India. In Group B,
again, the heavy iron javelins (nos. 64—6), plate armour for men and horses (nos. 90,
91), helmet (no. 92), and shield-bosses (nos. 93—5), and in Group C, the snafﬂe—bits
(nos. 9 5—8) and cheek-bars (nos. 99, 100) were introduced into the North-West by
the conquering Greeks or their successors, the Sakas and Parthians. Even in some
of the arrow-heads (nos. 72~89) we detect the inﬂuence of the Bactrian Greeks; in

[I It should be noted that only in the case of the ten specimens in the Table of Analysis on p. 536
has the precise nature of the metal, whether iron or steel, been determined. Other specimens described
in this chapter and classed, generally, as iron, may be either iron or steel.

MT 68

Disparity of
iron objects on
earlier and
later sites
explained

Classiﬁcation

Objects of
foreign origin