
CH. 25] STONE OBJECTS 481

stone but several more varieties of stone introduced. For vessels and other small
household objects, the stones that now come into use (besides several kinds of slate,
steatite and sandstone) are: schist, micaceous schist, hornblende schist, phyllite,
phyllitic slate and indurated clay or mudstone; while the stones in use for sculpture
are schist, micaceous schist, chloritic schist, quartz mica schist, phyllite, steatite or
soapstone of various kinds, Taraki grey sandstone and red ferruginous claystone.
Of these, the commonest by far and the most important are the several kinds of
schist and the dark grey phyllite which is used for the vast majority of Gandhara
sculptures. The use of both schist and phyllite was intimately bound up with the
history of sculpture at Taxila. The earliest specimens of schist are the grey schist
dishes nos. 38 and 39 and the carved toilet-tray no. 62, which are referable to the
latter part of the second century or the beginning of the ﬁrst century B.C. From
that time onwards schist comes more and more into vogue, and during the Parthian
domination is used commonly for caskets, household vessels, lamps and sculptures.
For the last mentioned, a chloritised micaceous schist was at ﬁrst favoured in
preference to other stones, phyllite then being exceedingly rare, even for household
vessels, but in the ﬁrst century A.D. phyllite began to supersede schist, no doubt
owing to its being more durable in other respects and less liable to split in the
process of carving; and from that time onwards nine—tenths or more of the carvings
found on the North—West Frontier and at Taxila are made of this stone.

The precise provenance of the several kinds of schist and phyllite stones is not
known, but there can be no doubt that all of them came from quarries in the
Gandhara region, pr‘Obably in the neighbourhood of Southern Swat, since it was
there that the Gandhara School of sculpture had its chief centre, and we may be
sure that, wherever that centre was, the stone quarries could not have been far
distant. Moreover, had the quarries been in the old North-West Frontier itself——
that is, within the conﬁnes of what until recently was British India, it is virtually
certain that they would long ago have been discovered. Some day, no doubt, they
will be located, and it may be that fresh light will then be thrown on the history
of this important school of sculpture. In the meantime it would be a helpful step,
particularly for elucidating the early chronology of this school, if someone equipped
with suﬂicient knowledge of the subject would examine the various collections of
these sculptures in India and Europe and classify them according to the varieties
of stone used. '

The stratigraphical chart which follows (pp. 482—3) shows the generic classiﬁca-
tion of the stone objects described below and their distribution in the successive
strata of the Bhir Mound and Sirkap, as well as on other sites. These objects do
not include the stone sculptures of an ornamental and mainly Buddhist character
described in chapter 36.

Some general remarks on the stone objects from the Bhir Mound will be found
in vol. I at pp. 102, 105, 108—9, 111; and on those from Sirkap at pp. 128, 133—4,
205, 207, 209—10. Other references are given in the individual entries of the

catalogue below.

 

Provenance of
schist and
phyllite

armament. ,4, ..