
«MWrW—Aﬂswmrwgwsﬂm

AWWQ‘WWE‘MEA

 

 

 

 

Character of
objects
described

Local
varieties of
stone

Other

varieties and
their
provenance

Chapter 25. STONE OBJECTS

F THE many objects of stone recovered from the ruins of Taxila the
most interesting are the sculptures described in chapter 36, which served
chieﬂy for the adornment of Buddhist buildings. But besides these
there is a large collection of utensils and other articles of daily use,

which come mainly from the Bhir Mound and Sirkap, and appertain to the period
from about 300 B.C. to A.D. 100. These articles comprise pivot-stones, querns and
mullers, pestles and mortars, grinding-mills, household vessels of various kinds,
lamps, toilet-trays and vases, burnishers, touchstones, palettes, spindle—whorls,
potters’ konoms and thatwds, amulets and sacred ring-stones, moulds, stones for
incrustation and inlay work, and a few miscellaneous pieces such as knife-handles
and dies. In addition to these, there are a number of ﬁnger-rings, seals, gems and
the like, made from precious or semi-precious stones, which the reader will ﬁnd
described in chapters 30, 31 and 34.

As explained in a previous chapter, there are only two varieties of stone found in
natural formation at Taxila itself, namely, the hard almost ﬂint-like limestone of
which the foothills round about are mainly composed, and the very coarse and soft
lime kankar or kaﬁjﬂr, as it is commonly called, which is abundant on every side
in the alluvium of the plain. Although these stones were used freely as building
materials, neither of them lent itself to the manufacture of small articles—the
kankar, because it was altogether too soft and coarse; the limestone, because it could
not be worked so well, and was not so attractive to look at, as other varieties of hard
stone of which many, in the form of pebbles, are washed down in the torrent beds
from the far-off Murree and Kashmir hills. We shall ﬁnd, therefore, that, while
kankar was never used at all for small objects, limestone was only used very rarely
for such simple little things as weights, mullers and moulds. There is only one
example of it having been turned on the lathe, namely, the unguent bottle from
Jandial, no. 59, a.

Apart from this local limestone, the hard stones used in the manufacture of
many of the small articles enumerated above were: blue serpentine,I sang—i—abri
or abri, basalt, quartzite, hornblende, hornblende-gneiss, gneiss, granite, pyroxene,
diorite, epidiorite, epidote-quartz, dolerite, black basanite, black and white syenite,
Lydian or touchstone and chert; to which must be added also the semi-precious
stones used for personal and other small ornaments including beads, viz. crystal,
agate, porcelain-agate, chalcedony, carnelian, red and green jasper, agate—jasper,
jade, jadeite, jade-nephrite, turquoise, lapis-lazuli, amethyst, garnet and beryl. Of
these, chert is found commonly in Sind and Balﬁchistan as well as in many other

‘ Among the many beads found at Taxila one is of red and six of blue serpentine. Cf. Beck, op. cit. ,

Pls. I, 25 and X, 26, 27.