
Other soft
stones used in
Bhir Mound
settlements

Wider use of
soft stones
under Greeks
and their
successors

“ alabaster, capable of resisting considerable heat. Alabaster and steatite, on the

 

480 STONE OBJECTS [011.25

known, not only from the many statues or reliefs of the early Mathura School
which are carved from it, but also from innumerable monuments of Moslem times
which were built of it at Agra, Delhi and Mathura. The third variety is also well
known from the historic pillars of this stone which were set up by the Emperor
As’oka in the third century 3.0. That this particular sandstone should be found in
the form of mullers at so remote a spot as Taxila is at ﬁrst sight surprising, since it
could hardly have been brought such a distance for the sole purpose of making
utensils which could have been equally well made of Taraki sandstone or of one of
the harder local stones. The explanation appears to be that As’oka had set up one or
more of his famous pillars, and possibly some other monuments as well, at Taxila ;that
these monuments had been thrown down and broken after the eclipse of the Maurya
power; and that the mullers were made out of some of the fragments, just as a
piece of one of these selfsame pillars was used last century for a road—roller and
a piece of another for a sugar-cane press! However this may be, these mullers of
Chunar stone are found only in the later deposits of the Maurya period in the Bhir
Mound, not in Sirkap or on any of the later sites. On the other hand, the Taraki,
Mathura, and quartzite sandstone all occur on the Sirkap site, in strata of the ﬁrst
century A.D., and besides them there occurs also on that site a variety of deeply
coloured red and purple sandstone belonging to the Murree group, which is
found in large deposits round about Sang—jani, some 10 miles south-east of
Taxila. ‘

The other soft stones found on the Bhir Mound are steatite, alabaster and slate.
All three of these have a wide distribution in India and are easily obtainable at
Taxila—slate especially so, since it is found in large quantities in the Hazara
district within a few miles of the city, and, as we have already seen, it was freely
used for the construction of drains and bathroom ﬂoors, while alabaster is equally
proliﬁc in the gypsum deposits at the foot of the Salt Range in the Panjab. Thanks
to their ﬁne texture, both slate and alabaster could be carved with the minutest
ﬁgures in relief, and we ﬁnd both of them employed for the exquisitely carved ring—
stones of Maurya date described below (nos. 129—31). Slate, too, was employed
for small jewellery and inlay moulds, since, apart from its ﬁne texture, it was, unlike

 

 

 

 

 

other hand, were occasionally used during the Maurya period for small household
vessels. That stone was not more freely employed during that period for household
vessels and utensils was in all probability due to the religious conservatism of the
people, who then as now were afraid of contaminating their food or drink if they
took them from any vessels other than the orthodox ones made either of earthen-
ware or of copper or brass. It was certainly not due to any lack of skill on the part
of the Maurya craftsman, who was unsurpassed in the cutting, carving and polishing
of hard stones.

With the advent of the Bactrian Greeks at Taxila the carving of stone in relief
and the turning of it on the lathe into vessels became increasingly common, and in
the later cities on the Sirkap site we ﬁnd not only far more objects made out of soft