
494 STONE OBJECTS [011. 25

is mgre conscientious than in the later trays. There is a certain distinctiveness, also,
about the style of no. 63, which dates probably from the ﬁrst century B.C. and reﬂects
the increasing decadence of Hellenistic art under Saka rule. The scene is of course a
purely Greek one, and, although the ﬁgures individually are crudely modelled and
stiff and wooden in their poses, their composition still reﬂects the older Hellenistic
tradition. In no. 65, on the other hand, we recognise the effect of the Graeco-
Roman art popularised at TaXila under Parthian rule, with its more crowded ﬁgures,
and much greater freedom of composition and drawing; and we are on quite safe
ground in referring to the same century (ﬁrst century A.D.) nos. 64, 66 and 76.
But, apart from these few specimens, it is diﬂicult to determine the respective
ages of these toilet-trays on the strength of their style alone. This difficulty arises
from the fact that, with the passing of the Bactrian Greeks and coming of the
Sakas, Hellenistic art in India rapidly declined, but revived again in the ﬁrst
century under the rule of the Parthians, and though in the interim Hellenistic art:
in Western Asia had to some extent been Romanised and undergone considerable
changes in consequence, nevertheless it is often impossible to determine whether
a particular example of debased Indo~Hellenistic work was executed before or
after the Parthian revival. And this is true not only ef these stone carvings but of
other branches of art as well. To be sure, the Indianised treatment of the couple in
no. 70, so strongly reminiscent of the Mathura School, enables us to relegate this
particular piece with conﬁdence to Parthian times, but it is not often that we get
such light from the Indian side. Take, for example, nos. 78, 79 and 82. We infer
from their ﬁndspots that they probably belong to the Saka period, but from their
style alone it would be impossible, in the present state Of our knowledge, to afﬁrm
that they were not strays from the Parthian level above.

In regard to Graeco-Roman toilet-trays from Egypt, 21 paper by Sir John Evans
in Proc. Soc. Antiq. (13 Feb. 1908) may be consulted, and also Flinders Petrie,
Objects of Daily Use, ch. X, pp. 37—9, where he summarises whatever had then
(1927) been published about these trays, their types and purpose.

62. Sk. ’29—1,894; Block B’; sq. 3 5-89’; stratum IV. Circular toilet-tray of ﬁne grey schist.
Diam. 431 in. Round top of rim, beaded border, encircled by running spiral. In centre,
erotic scene: to left, standing male ﬁgure, with hooded mantle over back; to right, kneeling
woman clad in himation or shawl, which her companion is pulling from her. Beneath them,
triple line of small rocks with larger rock on extreme right, which the woman holds with her
left hand. On back of tray, full-blown lotus in low relief. This is a familiar scene in Greek art,
the two ﬁgures being usually a satyr and a nymph, e.g. Brit. Mus. Sculpture Cat. no. 2202:
a marble relief representing a bearded satyr pulling aside the mantle of a nymph. Cf.
Baumeister, Denkmaeler, vol. III, p. 1564, and S. Reinach, Re’pertoire des peintures grecques
et romaines, p. 125, no. 9. The ﬁgures are in high relief on a plain ground; the modelling
is characteristic of the Hellenistic age and superior to that of any of the other toilet-trays.
(P1. 144, no. 62.)

63. Sk. ’29—2, 572; Block A’; sq. 15'98’; stratum V. Toilet-tray of grey schist, divided into
two registers. Diam. 5-31 in. In theggnpper register, a draped male ﬁgure reclining on couch,
with wine-cup in left hand. At head of? couch, a draped female seated on stool, with awine-cup
in left hand. Behind the couch, a second female, standing, with garland in upraised right hand.