
CH. 25] STONE OBJECTS 509

though, in the case of larger weights, sometimes conical. Why a spherical weight
should have Been preferred to a cubical or cOnical one, is not apparent, since it is
neither a convenient shape when the weights are being piled together in the scales,
nor, on the other hand, would it have stood in the way of dishonesty, if anyone had
wished to grind down their weights. Possibly there was some reason with which
we are not now acquainted.

Apart from their shape, there is another feature of these stone balls that requires
particular notice, because it may have to be taken into account when calculating
their original weight. Many of them have a small cylindrical hole drilled into their
surface, which was probably made when the weights were being ofﬁcially checked,
and left hollow, if the weight had to be reduced, or ﬁlled with lead, if it had to be
increased. Some of the balls still retain this lead packing in their cavities; in others
the cavities are hollow. We must not, however, take it for granted that the cavity
was always hollow, since in the course of the ages, the lead may obviously have
decayed or fallen out. Nor, on the other hand, must we take it for granted that
any given cavity was necessarily intended to be ﬁlled or partly ﬁlled. It may have
been made, merely to reduce the weight, when the balls were being ofﬁcially tested,
this being the quickest means of achieving that end. In the same way modern
iron weights often have circular cavities drilled ”out of their underside, which are
either left hollow or ﬁlled with lead according as the weight has to be reduced or
increased.

Altogether, some ﬁfty-four spherical weights have been found at Taxila, but of
these, two are evidently unﬁnished and eleven have their edges so rubbed or chipped
that it is impossible to draw reliable conclusions from them. The remaining thirty-
nine all come from Sirkap, twenty-ﬁve from the jeweller’s hoard in Block D’
(Sk. 933/56) ;I seven from another group (Sk. 729); and three from another
(Sk. 225). In discussing them I shall deal ﬁrst with the series of twenty-ﬁve from
the jeweller’s hoard, since these not only comprise the largest number, but
belonging as they did to a jeweller, by whom they would no doubt be used for the
weighing of precious metals, they are likely to have been more than usually
accurate. . . -

It needs but a glance at the serial ﬁgures of these weights given below to perceive
that the majority of them fall into a regular binary sequence of ratios. Thus, starting
from the last and smallest unit no. 25, which is 51-5 gr. tr., the ratios of the last
eighteen are, with one exception, as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64. The exception is no. 13,
which has a weight of 1,075 gr. tr. equivalent to twenty times the smallest unit. Now,
eliminating the two weights 16 and 23, which are damaged, and taking the average
of the remainder, we ﬁnd that the unit works out at 52-3 gr. tr. or, allowing for wear
and tear, say 53 gr. tr. This is the weight of the standard Indian punch—marked
coin known as kdrshdpazza, and also one of the commonest units in the prehistoric
weights of the Indus valley. The series of weights, then, should be, 53, 106, 212,
424, 848 (1,060), 1,696, 3,392 gr. tr. It may be that the loss from wear and tear

I See vol. I, pp. 188—9. - '

MT 65

 

.WMW, .