
CH. 30] GOLD AND SILVER JEWELLERY . 621

inferred that the design originated in Syria or Egypt, and that the not infrequent
specimens found in late Etruscan tombs of the third or second century B.C. were
imports from one or other of those countries. At Taxila the earliest example (no. I)
dates from the third to second century B.C. The other example is of the ﬁrst
century A.D. Cf. RM. Cat. of jewellery, pp. xliii-iv and nos. 23 56-7, 2442—3, and
Pls. LI and LII.

(b) Disk-and—pendant and bar-and—pendant types. In Greece this type goes back
to the early sixth century B.C. and continues without interruption to the third
century A.D. Cf. B.M. Cat. pp. xxxiii, and 180~3; Pl. XXX, nos. I662, I663, I672,
I673, 1675, etc.; Pl. XL, no. 2064.

(c) Leech-and—pendant type. The ‘leech’ ear-ring, which can be traced back to
Mycenaean times, does not appear to have survived in Greece itself after the fourth
century B.C., though in the modiﬁed form of a ﬂat crescent it was still found as late
as the second century A.D. In Etruria, however, it continued on until at least the
third century B.C., the later examples being frequently distinguished by the
pendent clusters of drops and granules attached to the leech. The bud—pendants,
which are characteristic of the Taxila specimens, may have been evolved in Western
Asia or Egypt during the later Hellenistic period. Cf. B.M. Cat. of jewellery,
pp. xxxiii, x1, and nos. 321 if, I653—61,2239—4o, 2252, 2256, 2258, 2259, 2262 ; and
for the ‘leech’ motif in ﬁbulae, nos. I376~81, etc., and Dar. et Sag. III, p. 445,
ﬁg. 4017, and fn. II, where references are given to examples from the Crimea as
well as from Etruria. '

(d) Flower-and—pendant type. In this type the pendant takes the form of a
ﬂower, usually six-petalled, hanging downward, with the tips of its leaves attached
to a beaded ring from which chains and bells are suspended. The type calls to mind
the ‘tassel’ pendants of Graeco—Roman jewellery, e.g. B.M. Cat. Pl. LI.

Besides the elaborate types of pendants described above, two simpler kinds of
ear-rings are also found at Taxila, Viz.:

(e) Ring type. This is a small ear-ring of solid gold with the ends twisted back
in a spiral round half or more of the ring. In some specimens the ring is thickened
at the base. Greek ear—rings of this type exhibit the same method of binding the
drawn-out ends spirally round the ring, but in the earlier examples, which go back
to the ﬁfth century B.C. and were favourite in Hellenistic times, one apex of the
ring usually terminates in an ornamental head (of a lion, bear, tiger, maenad,
negro, Eros, etc.); later examples are commonly Without this ornament. Cf. B.M.
Cat. pp. xxxiii—xxxiv, and Pls. XXXI, XXXII and LIII.

(f) Heart-shaped type. Whether this type of ear-ring derived from Greek or
Graeco-Roman prototypes is questionable. The small clusters of globules at the
base of the rings is certainly a Western touch, but the shape was familiar in India
as far back as the Chalcolithic period, as attested by bracelets and other articles
from Harappa and Mohenjo-daro.

1. Gold ear-pendant of ‘amphora’ type. Height 1-7 in. It consists of two separate pieces,
the upper one attached to the lower by means of a hook which passes through a hole in the

MT 79

 

Amphora
type