
‘ Indo—Afghan ’
School of
fourth and
ﬁfth centuries
A.D.

Increasing
popularity of
stucco and its
causes

 

514 STUCCO SCULPTURES [011.26

the Dharmarajika. As already stated, the pylons were added to the plinth in the
early part of the second century A.D., and there can be little doubt that the stucco
ornamentation was contemporary with them. The ﬁgures are in the same style as
the stone Gandhara reliefs which were preserved in chapel L close by, and it is
not unlikely that they were executed by one or other of the artists responsible for
those sculptures, since it is quite clear that the sculptor who designed and executed
them must have come from Gandhara itself. (Cf. pp. 2 53‘4 supra.)

Then, two or three generations later, we have the remains of some stucco images
enshrined in the plinth niches of stﬁpas KI and N4, likewise at the Dharmarajika
site. The best preserved of these is the ﬁgure of the Buddha on the north face of
KI (p. 262 supra, and P1. 57, b), but even this is headless, and all that can be said
of the draped body is that it is gracefully modelled and quite in keeping with the
date assigned to it (late second or early third century A.D.).

With these few exceptions, however, there are no surviving specimens of stucco
ﬁgures at Taxila between the ﬁrst and fourth centuries A.D., nor have any examples
of sculptures in this material been found at other contemporary sites in the North-
West. During the Kushan period a vast amount of sculpture was, as we know, turned
out in this part of India, but it seems to have been mainly executed in schist or
phyllite from the region of Swat or in a white calcareous stone from the neighbour-
hood of Jelalabad in Southern Afghanistan, or else in clay, which, save in very rare
cases (where ﬁre has intervened to preserve it), has inevitably perished in the course
of the ages. Before the discoveries at Taxila had thrown new light on the subject,
it used to be thought that the remains of numerous stucco reliefs found at Sahri—
Bahlol, Takht-i—Bahi and other sites belonged to the Kushan period and were
contemporary with the familiar stone reliefs of the Gandhara School. It is now
clear that this was a mistake. All the reliefs in question are in precisely the
same style as the fourth- to ﬁfth—century work at Taxila, and there can be no
question that they are of the same age.I The same is true also of the numerous
stucco ﬁgures unearthed by the French Mission at Hadda and other sites in
Afghanistan.2

At this time stucco, as a material for sculpture, was assuming an importance
which it had not known before and has not known since. In the new School which
began to take shape in the fourth century—a School which we may conveniently
designate the ‘Indo-Afghan’——-stucco was coming to be used not only in place of
stone but largely in place of clay as well. Over stone it naturally had a signal
advantage in that it needed no chisel for its carving, could be easily manipulated

I Cf. The Stﬁpas and Monasteries at jauliaﬁ (A.S.I. Mem. no. 7), p. 33, Where M. Foucher accepts
the late Dr D. B. Spooner’s interpretation and dating of certain stucco reliefs. The head from Takht-i-
Bahi said by the latter to have come from a Temptation Scene was in all likelihood that of a grotesque
atlant, and the two mutilated ﬁgures at the side of a Buddha from Sahri—Bahlol may well have repre—
sented the donors. At the best their evidence is very questionable. Cf. A.S.R. (1907—8), pp. 136—7
and ibid. (1909—10), p. 48.

7' E.g. L’G‘uvre de la De’le’gation arche’ologique franfaz'se en Afghanistan (Tokyo: Maison franco-
japonaise, 1933), se'r. A, tome 1, P15. 1—4, 6—8, 10'25, 31 and 32.