
CH. 26] STUCCO SCULPTURES 525

To the above description it should be added that: (a) In the second and top
tiers the forefronts of lions and elephants were sometimes added at the base of
the portal jambs and trefoil arches which enclosed the niches. (b) The Perse-
politan pilaster—capitals were usually crowned with bulls, back to back. (0) The
atlantes generally took the form of warriors or musicians or ﬁgures holding wine—
cups. (d) The ﬁgures beside the Buddha rest, as a rule, on a kind of lotus stool.
Sometimes they are two Buddhas, seated and meditating; sometimes they are two
monks or two lay-worshippers, kneeling and praying or bringing offerings of fruit
or ﬂowers in their robes or in a basket, or occasionally with caskets in their hands,
containing treasures of one kind or another (no. 43=Pl. 156, a). (e) Figures of
seated Buddha are sometimes substituted on the face of the Corinthian pilasters in
place of the usual small incised panels, e.g. on the pilasters on the west face of
stﬁpa D4 (no. 44=Pl. 154, b). The above was the scheme of decoration on the
majority of these small stﬁpas, but in some cases it was varied by inserting a row
of seated Buddhas or Bodhisattvas side by side and without any adventitious
decoration beneath the lowest course of lions and atlantes, as in stﬁpa A11. In
a few cases, as in A15, the whole plinth was occupied by such ﬁgures, but as
already stated, this may represent an earlier type of decoration.

Such intensive repetition of ﬁgures is not found in stﬁpas of the earlier Gandhara
School. The new fashion was to some extent the result of the stereotyping and
commercialising of art; but it arose still more from the ever-growing practice of
repeating the ﬁgures of the Blessed One in countless numbers, so that the donor
of them might achieve a corresponding increase in the volume of his merit.

The general appearance of these stﬁpa-bases will be clear from the illustrations
of stﬁpas A16 and D4 (nos. 45—7) on Pls. 156 and 157.

The former, which is the smaller of the two, is now in the local museum; the
latter still stands on the spot where it was unearthed. Although the description
given above applies accurately to both, there are certain features that merit further
attention. One of these is that, while in stﬁpa A 16 all the ﬁgures in the niches are
Buddhas seated in the attitude of Teaching or of Contemplation, in theupper section
of D4 as well as in D1, Bodhisattvas are substituted for some of the Buddhas.
Another noteworthy feature is the sloppy and unconvincing postures of the atlantes,
not only on these, but on all the stﬁpas of this period. It is a natural and logical
expectation that any supporting ﬁgures of the kind, whether atlantes or caryatids
or animals, should be sufﬁciently big and strong to appear to support the super-
incumbent weight; but these atlantes are not only absurdly small in proportion
to the size of the structure, but they are in attitudes which suggest that, instead
of sustaining the mass above them, they are being crushed beneath its burden.

A third point of interest is that among the many pairs of attendants on the
Buddhas or the Bodhisattvas we encounter here and there some women. One such
pair of women occurs in a panel in the lower row on the north face of stﬁpa D4
(no. 48=Pl. 154, c). In the centre, is a meditating Buddha, and to right‘and left

of his trefoil niche a woman seated on a high seat in European fashion. The one to
MT 57