
Buddhas

 

526 STUCCO SCULPTURES [CH. 26

the proper right of the Buddha holds in both hands a covered vessel, the bottom
of which rests on her left hand, while with her right hand she seems about to
lift off the tall lid. The other one holds in her right hand a drinking—cup and in
her left a spear. These are distinguishing attributes of Kubera, the dispenser of
riches, in his capacity of leader of the yakshas, and later on were transferred to his
consort Hariti, the demon mother of children and giver of prosperity. We may be
sure, therefore, that these women are meant to be yakshiuis, embodying some
popular superstition or other.I Hariti herself, so the legend goes, was converted
by the Buddha and became an upasika‘ or lay—disciple; and to feed her 500 children,
whom she had formerly fed on the ﬂesh of human children, Buddha told her that

the bhikshus in the monasteries should every day offer her food from their portions.

. Hence, I—tsing tells us, an image of Hariti was placed either in the porch or in the

corner of the dining-hall of Indian monasteries, and abundant offerings of food
were made to it.2

C. Miscellaneous detached sculptures. Nos. 49—71 (cf. ch. 20, pp. 371, 384).

49. In. ’16—57; north-east of main stﬁpa. Stucco head of the Buddha. Height 21 ' 5 in. Lime—
wash. Traces of red paint on edges of hair and on right ear. No slip preserved. This and the
following head belonged to two of the colossal Buddhas which adorned the walls of the main
stﬁpa, and are ﬁne specimens of their kind, both probably by the same hand. The hair is
treated in much the same way as on the small head from Mohra Moradu (no. 35 supra) but the
features are not so reﬁned and delicate as in that example. The ﬁrm" was probably composed,
as it appears to have been in most of the colossal heads, of a round piece of rock—crystal cut
en cabochon and sunk in the surface of the plaster. j‘n. Mem. p. 42, no. 57. (Pl. I49, m.)

50. In. ’16—32; north—east of main stﬁpa. Stucco head of the Buddha. Height 21-75 in.
Back of head partly missing and ears damaged. Lime-wash. Traces of red paint on hair and
ears. Slip not preserved. ju. Mem. Pl. IV, 1) (P1. 149, n.)

51. In. ’16—F 563. Height 6-12 in. This was once a head of exceptional beauty, showing
great delicacy in the modelling of the lips and cheeks. Unfortunately, the ushm'sha is missing
and the nose and ear-lobes are damaged. There is a buff slip and traces of red paint on lips and
eyes, and of black paint on the hair and eyebrows. (P1. 153, b.)

The remaining Buddha heads from Iauliaﬁ, illustrated on P1. I 58, are much
inferior in style and execution to the preceding, but they are the work of various
hands and represent several characteristic types of which there are many more
examples at Taxila. Thus, no. 52 belongs to a class of heads which are distinguished
by a rather small chin and largish mouth, with the underlip deﬁned by a simple
curve at the lower edge, giving a slightly supercilious look to the face. In this type,
too, both the upper and lower eyelids are bordered by simple instead of reﬂex
curves, and, as a rule, the cheek—bones are wide and pronounced, though more so
in other examples than in the one illustrated. No. 53 on the other hand, has a
narrower face with higher forehead, more rounded cheeks and a small mouth,
which imparts to it a rather insipid and soulless expression; and the same remarks

1 Cf. Foucher in jauh'dﬁ Mem. p. 28.
1 Cf. Grunwedel, Buddhist Art in India, p. 105.