
Chapter 26. STUCCO SCULPTURES

HE ART of modelling in plaster appears to have been introduced into
India from the WestI by the Sakas or Parthians, most probably by the
latter. No trace of moulded plaster-work has been found among the ruins
on the Bhir Mound or in the Greek strata of Sirkap. The earliest example
of it may be the bold acanthus-leaf decoration on the small stﬁpa in Block E of the
latter site (P1. 27, a and p. 158), which, as already stated, dates from the beginning
of the Christian era or from a decade or two earlier, though it is possible in this
case that the decoration is substantially later than the body of the monument. Of
ﬁgural work in stucco the oldest specimens I have found at Taxila or that are
known to exist anywhere in India are the sculptures which adorned the two small
stﬁpas in front of the apsidal temple in Block D of Sirkap.2 The exceptional value
that these sculptures possess for the history of early art in the Panjab has already
”been stressed. Taken in conjunction with other antiquities of the same age from
TaXila, they give us for the ﬁrst time a correct idea of the character and quality
of art in this part of India in the middle of the ﬁrst century A.D., when the nascent
art of Gandhara was beginning to make its appearance at TaXila. Of true Indian
art, such as was then prevalent in Hindustan and Central India, there was next to
none. Under the Parthian domination the only art that counted was the Hellenistic,
and in nine cases out of ten the efforts of the local sculptors were directed to
producing something in imitation of that art.
Of the stucco ﬁgures from the apsidal temple that we are here considering
a few are so characteristically Hellenistic that they; might equally well have been
turned out at Seleucia or at Antioch as at Taxila; and it is reasonable, therefore, to
infer that they are the work of some foreign artist, who, if not a Greek himself, had
at least been trained in a Hellenistic School. Most of the ﬁgures, however, are
evidently the handiwork of local craftsmen who were doing their best to copy
Hellenistic models but Without properly grasping the essentials of Hellenistic art,
and whose efforts, therefore, are rarely very successful and not infrequently border
on the grotesque.
The stucco of which these early sculptures are made is composed of lime mixed
freely with small, broken stone (bajﬁ) and other foreign matter. It is much coarser
than the stucco found on the later monuments at Jauliaﬁ, Mohra Moradu, etc.,
nor is there any trace of the ﬁne ﬁnishing coat or of the colours which in the later
stuccos were used to pick out certain details.
The next landmark in the history of stucco—work at T axila is furnished by the
remnants of a few reliefs on the pylons and west facade of the stﬁpa—plinth R3 at

I For Graeco-Roman stucco-work, see Dar. et Sag. 3.72. ‘Tectorium’ and ﬁgs. 3233, 6760.
2 Cf. vol. I, pp. 154—5. ‘

History of -
stucco-work
in North—
West

Earliest
examples at
Taxila

Stucco ﬁgures
of Parthian
period from
Sirkap and
their classiﬁ-
cation

Composition
of stucco in
Parthian
period

Stucco reliefs
of Kushan

period at
Dharmarajika

 

3
i,
i