
“W wxiwmwmemiw"WM‘Cmstswiuswwsmmmmwwmwr

 

“mum‘nm‘wsmﬁw Mum:

 

 

CH. 26] srucco SCULPTURES 515

by hand, and, if desired, even cast in a mould. On the other hand, though less
plastic than clay, it was far more durable, especially in positions exposed to the
weather. This convenience in handling and this durability of stucco go far to
explain its growing popularity among the Indo—Afghan sculptors, but there were
other reasons also for this popularity which must not be lost sight of. One was
that since the eclipse of the Gandhara School under the Kushans, the chief centres
of art in the North-West had shifted from the spots where stone could be readily
procured for sculpture. At Taxila itself, which was certainly one of the most
important of these centres, the only kinds of stone available were an excessively
hard limestone, which was too refractory to be carved into statues, and a soft
porous kaﬁjﬁr, which was too soft and coarse to be cut into subtle and delicate
forms. In Southern Afghanistan sculptors seem to have been little better off. The
ﬁne hornblende- and mica—schist stones which had been used by the sculptors of
Gandhara, were not to be found there, and in default of these they had to fall back
on a local variety of white porous limestone, which was by no means so well suited
to their purpose. With the rise, however, of the Indo-Afghan School they pro-
ceeded to follow the same course as their brethren at Taxila and to make use almost
exclusively of stucco, clay and terra-cotta.

Another reason for the freer use of stucco at this period was the facility it offered
for the reduplication of Buddha or Bodhisattva images, to which increasing im-
portance had come to be attached. Under the early Kushans, the decoration of
stﬁpas and chapels had consisted largely of scenes from the previous births or from
the last life of the Buddha, but these scenes, so familiar in Gandhara art, had fallen
out of fashion, and by the ﬁfth century AD. the creation of an image of the Buddha
or (if one of the Bodhisattvas had come to be regarded as a work of merit in itself,
and the more images of this kind that a man could get fashioned, the more likely
was he to attain the geal of his salvation. Hence arose the practice of erecting an
everaincreasing number of stﬁpas and of decorating them from head to foot with
countless repetitions of these sacred figures. And in the fashioning of them stucco
was an invaluable agent, since with its aid it became possible to turn out ﬁgure after
ﬁgure (many, it might be, from one and the same mould) with the greatest possible
expedition and at the smallest cost.

Among the thousands of stucco reliefs recovered amid the ruins of the later
Buddhist monuments at T axila, it goes without saying that all are not of the
same age. The destruction of most of the monuments to which they belonged
took place, as we have seen, in the latter part of the ﬁfth century A.D., and at the
time when it happened some had no doubt been standing for several decades, some
had survived from Kushan times or even earlier, and others had probably been
erected in quite recent years. It is tempting, therefore, to try and arrange these
Indo—Afghan sculptures in some sort of chronological sequence, and since we have
no precise evidence of their respective dates, to endeavour to do so on the basis of
their style alone. It is questionable, however, if such an attempt can ever succeed.
Without doubt, there are many striking differences in the style of these reliefs.

Reduplication
of sacred
images

Age and
varying merit
of stucco
reliefs of Indo-

Afghan School