
CH. 26] STUCCO SCULPTURES 521

STUCCO RELIEFS OF MOHBA MORADU. Nos. 30—8, a. (Cf. ch. 18, pp. 358—64.)

A. Reliefs on the main stﬂpa. Among the most beautiful sculptures of the Indo-
Afghan School, whether of stucco, clay or terra—cotta, are the reliefs already
referred to, on the south face of the main stﬁpa at Mohra Moradu. This face was
divided by slender pilasters into eight bays, each of which was subsequently
adorned with a group of ﬁgures, comprising one or more images of the Buddha
with attendant Bodhisattvas or devas, while the faces of the pilasters themselves
were enriched with two seated ﬁgures of the Buddha, one above the other, some
enthroned on lotuses, some on simple seats. Of these eight groups the most
arresting is the one in the fourth bay from the western end, to which the premier
place was evidently given in virtue of its being opposite, or virtually opposite, the
central north-south axis of the stﬁpa drum. The group in this bay, nos. 30, 31 (Pls.
I50, a, I 5 I), comprised a seated Buddha in the middle with a standing Bodhisattva on
either side, two celestial beings (devas) coming out of the background, on each side
of the Buddha’s head, and two other ﬁgures—probably Bodhisattvas—enthroned
on lotuses in the top corners. The image of the Buddha in the centre is seated in
the Teaching attitude (s’z'kshd—mudra') on a lion-throne (simha‘sana), in front of which
are four miniature ﬁgures of lay-worshippers, including perhaps the donor of the
group, two on one side of a bowl, two on the other. All the reliefs are coated
with a thin slip of ﬁne plaster, and there are traces on them of the buff, red and
black paints with which such ﬁgures seem to have been invariably embellished. The
beauty of the group is necessarily much impaired by the damage it has sustained,
especially to the head and hands of the central image, but the attendant Bodhisattvas
and the deva above the left shoulder of the Buddha give us a splendid conception
of what the Indo-Afghan School, at its best, was capable of achieving. In the whole
range of Indian sculpture it would be difﬁcult to point to ﬁgures more beautifully
conceived or more perfectly executed than these. Observe the Bodhisattva on the
right (Pl. 151); how digniﬁed his posture, as he stands slightly inclining towards
the central image; how calm his expression; how delicate the modelling of his
features. And notice, too, with what consummate skill the sculptor has handled
his garments, draping the dhoti ever so lightly and gracefully about his legs, turning
the long scarf in stylish folds about his arms, and giving to the whole a delicate
suggestion of movement, as if the Bodhisattva were being borne insensibly towards
the Buddha. Then turn from this ﬁgure and observe the deva above, emerging out
of the background. Nothing could be more tender than the attitude of his hands
or more gentle than the expression on his face, as he descends from heaven to do
homage to the Great Teacher. It is not only that these ﬁgures are nobly conceived;
they are ﬁnished in every detail with exquisite grace and feeling.

The draperies merit special notice. Although more formal and stylish than
Hellenistic draperies, they exhibit the same technical methods as the latter in the
treatment of their folds; that is to say, the mass of the material between the folds
is cut away, and the folds themselves left standing out in relief, as they naturally