
522 STUCCO SCULPTURES [CH. 26

do in any thin material. Roman sculptors, as is well known, made a practice of
cutting away only the narrow folds and leaving the mass of the material between
them unchiselled, thereby saving much labour but producing an effect which was
not true to nature. Obviously it is much easier to adopt the Greek method when

modelling in plaster or clay than when chiselling stone or marble, and, provided
that a sculptor is conscientious in his work, it is the method to which, irrespective
of tradition, he must inevitably be led, since it is the only one that is correct. But
in the case of the Indo-Afghan School, there can be little room for doubt that in
this, as in many other features, it inherited the Hellenistic tradition through the
Gandhara School. That does not mean, of course, that this phase of art was merely
a derivative or later reﬂexion of Gandhara art. It owed many of its motifs and
ideas and much of its hieratic character to that art, but it went far beyond it, both
in pure decorative beauty and in the expression of religious sentiment, and in these
spheres it established new and far-reaching traditions which profoundly inﬂuenced
the character of the Gupta and later medieval art of India.

Compared with the foregoing, the reliefs in the other bays are of little interest. It might have
been expected that the groups to the right and left would have been made to balance or at least
to correspond in some measure with one another. But this was not the case. The bay on the
left, i.e. the third in order from the south-west corner, contains the seated Buddha (no. 32:
Pl. I 50, b) in the Teaching attitude, and on each side of him a Bodhisattva seated cross-legged
on a lotus, while between them were smaller standing figuresI and other Bodhisattvas and devas
above. The group is not unattractive, but it misses altogether the ﬁne feeling and masterly
handling of the central one. The modelling of the Buddha is less sympathetic, his draperies
coarser and more formal, and the two seated Bodhisattvas have none of the dignity and grace
that belong to their standing counterparts in the other bay. Their drawing and modelling are
weak, their ornaments not so reﬁned, and the countenance of the one on the right (the only
countenance preserved) wears an almost fatuous expression. In the second and ﬁfth bays
(nos. 33, 34=Pl. 152, a, b) the inferiority is still more marked. In each bay there are three
seated Buddhas in the attitude of Teaching or of Meditation, and between them stand two
Bodhisattvas. None of the ﬁgures, either seated or standing, has any pretention to artistic
merit, let alone to spiritual beauty; they are merely stock types turned out, as it were, and
repeated mechanically at so much a ﬁgure, as we shall see presently that thousands of miniature
ﬁgures were repeated on the smaller stﬁpas. A typical specimen is the standing Bodhisattva
on the right hand of panel 34, which is illustrated on a large scale on P1. I 55, 0. Setting it by
the side of the corresponding ﬁgure of the central group, one can see at once how weak and
ill-proportioned it is, the head and feet too big for the rest of the body, the features awry, the
expression devoid of meaning, the ornaments and drapery clumsy and overdone.

B. Detached heads, etc. Nos. 3 5—8. Besides the reliefs in situ many detached
heads and other fragments of stucco were found among the ruins at Mohra Moradu,
among which the following are deserving of special notice:

35. Mm. ’15—297; cell 19; 8 ft. below surface. Height 7 in. Small head of the Buddha, in
a ﬁne state of preservation and remarkable for the beauty of its high-caste and ﬁnely modelled
features. Only the ear-lobes are damaged. The ﬁrm? is small, but prominent; the hair waved
back from the forehead. Traces of red paint on lips, eyelids, forehead and neck. This head

I One of these standing ﬁgures—between the Buddha and the seated Bodhisattva on his right—was
too decayed to be replaced when the panel was set up in the museum.